2
The     Reconstruction                  of    Religious
Thought          in    Islam

by Allama.Mohammad Iqbal
Editor’s Introduction

In the present edition of Allama Iqbal’s The Reconstruction
of Religious Thought in Islam, an attempt has been made at
providing references to many authors cited in it and, more
particularly, to the passages quoted from their works. The
titles of these works have not always been given by the
Allama and, in a few cases, even the names of the authors
have to be worked out from some such general descriptions
about them as ‘the great mystic poet of Islam’, ‘a modern
historian of civilization’, and the like.

The work, however, referred to more often than any other,
and quoted most, is the Qur’«n. Of a large number of
passages quoted from it, about seventy-seven, generally set
apart from the main text, carry numbered references to the
Quranic Su`rahs and verses. The unnumbered passages
from the Qur’«n, about ﬁfty or so, given within the text are
comparatively briefer - sometimes very brief, merely calling
attention to a unique expression of the Qur’«n. References
to these as well as to many Quranic ideas and quite a few
Quranic subjects, alluded to especially in the ﬁrst ﬁve
Lectures, have been supplied in the Notes and later also in
the Index of Quranic References. A numerical scanning of
this Index shows quite signiﬁcantly that the number of
verses bearing on the subjects of ‘man’, ‘Quranic
empiricism’ and the ‘phenomenon of change’ (mostly in
terms of alternation of the night and the day and also in a
wider sense) in each case, is comparatively larger than the

3
number of verses on any other single subject. This may as
well be noted in the clustering  of such verses or of
references to them on quite a few pages of the
Reconstruction.

Added to the verses quoted from the Qur’«n and references
to them, in the present  work, are a good number of quite
signiﬁcant observations and statements embodying
Allama’s rare insight into the  Qur’«n born of his peculiarly
perceptive and deep study of it. These are to be found
scattered all over the work, except in  Lecture VII, where one
would notice just one observation and complete absence of
passages from the Qur’«n, possibly because it was originally
addressed to a non-Muslim audience. About sixty-ﬁve of
these observations and statements have been listed in the
general Index under: ‘observations and statements based
on’ as a sub-entry of the ‘Qur’«n’.

Of the other works quoted from in the Reconstruction, forty-
nine that I could work out and later  list in the Index, about
ﬁfteen are by Muslim authors, mostly mystics  and mystic
poets. Passages from these Muslim works, originally in
Arabic, Persian or Turkish, have been given, with the single
exception of Rëmâ’s Mathnawi, in their ﬁrst-ever English
translation by Allama Iqbal. Notable among these are
passages from Fakhr al-Dân al-R«zâ’s Al-Mab«hith al-
Mashriqâyah and Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi`'s Maktëb«t and,
above all, Ziya Gokalp’s Turkish poems, which the Allama
was able to render into English from their German version
by August Fischer in his Aus der religiö sen
Reformbewegung in der Tü rkei (Leipzig, 1922).

Equally important and perhaps more are Allama’s
condensed English versions of considerably longer passages
or sections from Ibn Maskawaih’s al-Fauz al-Asghar (on
evolutionary hypothesis in both  the biological and the

4
spiritual sense), Sh«h Walâ’ullah magnum opus alHujjat
All«h al-B«lighah (on the prophetic method of building up a
universal Sharâ’ah) and ‘Ir«qâ’s Gh«yat al-Imk«n fâ`Dir«yat
al-Mak«n (on the plurality of space-orders and timeorders).
This last, the longest of all the summarized translations  from
works in Arabic or Persian, was originally prepared by
Allama Iqbal from the, then a rare, Manuscript for his
Sectional Presidential Address: ‘A Plea for Deeper Study of
the Muslim Scientists’ presented at the Fifth Oriental
Conference, Lahore: 20-22 November 1928. The translation
of the passage from Sh«h Walâ ‘All«h’s Al-Hujjat All«h al-
B«lighah however, seems to belong to a still later date.
There is a clear reference to this signiﬁcant passage in
Allama Iqbal’s letter addressed to Sayyid Sulaim«n Nadvâon
22 September 1929, i.e. a month before he delivered the
ﬁrst six Lectures at the Aligarh Muslim University. All these
summarized translations, it may  be added, from parts of the
main text of Lectures III, V and VI.

As to Rëmâ’s Mathnawâ, quoted very extensively (six of its
verses are quoted even in the original Persian), one is to
note that the translations  of all the passages from it are not
by Allama Iqbal himself but by others: Whinﬁeld,  Nicholson
(with certain modiﬁcations)  and Thadani, only in one case
has the Allama given his own translation of a verse from
Rëmâ (p. 88); but, unbelievable though it is, this  verse,
according to the Persian translator of the Reconstruction, is
to be found neither in the Mathnawânor  in the Kulliy«t-i
Shams. This certainly needs further research. However,
almost every time a passage is quoted from the
Mathnawâor even a reference is made to it, the reader is
reminded of ‘the beautiful  words of Rëmâ’ and of his being
‘far more true to  the spirit of Islam than’,  says, ‘Ghazz«`lâ’.

Of about thirty-four  Western writers from whose works the
Allama has quoted, as many as twenty-ﬁve were his

5
contemporaries and among these one is to underline the
names of Whitehead, Eddington, Wildon Carr, Louis Rougier,
and certainly also of Spengler. One is also to note that the
works of these and other contemporaries quoted from
happen to be mostly those which were published between
1920 and 1928. This is not at all to minimize the  importance
of quite signiﬁcant passages quoted from the  works of
Bergson, James, Hocking and even Aghnides, all published
before 1920, but only to refer  to the fact of there  being a
greater number of quotations in  the Reconstruction from
Western works published within a certain period of time.

The year 1920, in fact, happens to be the year of the
publication of Einstein’s epoch-making Relativity: The
Special and the General Theory: A Popular Exposition. And it
is the year also of the publication of Eddington’s Space,
Time and Gravitation and Wildon Carr’s General Principle of
Relativity in Its Philosophical and Historical Aspect, perhaps
the earliest expository works on Relativity  by English
writers. Passages from both these works are to be found in
the Reconstruction. Einstein’s own work is catalogued in
Allama’s personal library along with a dozen others bearing
on Relativity-Physics.

Mention must also be made here of Alexander’s peculiarly
diﬃcult two-volume  Space, Time and Deity, which on its
appearance in 1920 was hailed as ‘a philosophical event of
the ﬁrst rank’.  This is perhaps the ﬁrst contemporary work
which received Allama’s immediate professional comments,
even though brief, embodying his signiﬁcant  admission:
‘Alexander’s thought is much bolder than  mine’. Despite
Alexander’s pronounced realistic (and thereby also
naturalistic-empiric tic  and so scientiﬁc) metaphysics, the
Allama seems to have found in his supreme ‘principle of
emergence’ a kind of empirical conﬁrmation  of Bergson’s
creative evolution. It was verily  in terms of the principle  of

6
emergence that he explained to Nicholson his idea of
Perfect Man in contradistinction to that  of Nietzsche’s
Superman in his long, perhaps the longest, letter addressed
to him on 24 January 1921. 
Allama Iqbal’s assessment of the works of Western writers,
especially of those which received his closest attention,
seems to be characterized by the ambivalence of
admiration and dissatisfaction, or acceptance and rejection.
This is also reﬂected in one of his most valuable dicta
addressed to Muslims: ‘Approach modern knowledge with a
respectful but independent attitude’  (p. 78).  Nowhere is this
ambivalence perhaps better exempliﬁed than  in Allama’s
treatment of Spengler’s Decline of the West; two volumes
published in April 1926 and November 1928. He readily
accepts some of Spengler’s pronouncements such as these:
‘The history of Western knowledge is thus one of
progressive emancipation from classical thought’; ‘The
symbol of the West . . . is the (mathematical)  idea of
function’; ‘Not until  the theory  of functions was evolved’
could it become possible for us to have ‘our dynamic
Western physics’. But the Allama was completely
dissatisﬁed with the very  central thesis of The Decline of the
West ‘that cultures, as organic structures, are completely
alien to one another’. In his Address at the Oriental
Conference, he pointedly observed that facts ‘tend  to falsify
Spengler’s thesis’. It was this thesis or doctrine of ‘mutual
alienation of cultures’ or cultural  isolationism, the Allama
strongly felt, that  blinded Spengler to the undeniable Muslim
inﬂuences or ingredients in the development  of European
culture. There is no mention in his otherwise ‘extremely
learned work’ of such known facts of history as the anti-
classicism of the Muslim thinkers, which found its clearest
expression in the work of the very brilliant  Ibn Khaldën -
Spengler’s Muslim counterpart in many ways. Nor is there
any reference, in The Decline of the West, to Al-Bârënâ’s
‘theory of functions’,  clearly enunciated in his al-Q«nën al-

7
Mas’ëdâ, six hundred years before Fermat and Descartes - a
fact which Spengler had every right to know for  he was so
well versed in mathematics, and even as a historian of
cultures.

Again, while referring to Spengler’s allegation that  ‘the
culture of Islam is thoroughly Magian in spirit and character’
Allama Iqbal candidly observes: ‘That a Magian crust has
grown over Islam, I do not deny’. And he adds quite
importantly for  us: ‘Indeed, my main purpose in these
lectures has been to secure a vision of the spirit of Islam as
emancipated from its Magian overlayings’ (p. 114).
However, Spengler’s vision of Islam as a cultural movement,
according to Allama, was completely perverted by his thesis
of ‘mutual alienation of  cultures’ and also by his
morphological approach to history, which led him to  group
Islam as a culture with the manifestly Magian cultures of
Judaism, Zoroastrianism and others. Allama Iqbal did
recognize the historical fact that Islam imported  some
concepts and a ‘religious experience’ - as reﬂected, for
instance, in some esoteric traditions in Muslim theology and
in certain theosophical and occultistic tendencies in Suﬁsm -
from these earlier cultures in the period  of its expansion as
also in later periods especially when the conquered became
conquerors culturally. But these importations, the Allama
insisted, remained all along the husk of Islam, its Magian
crust or its Magian overlayings. Spengler’s capital error is
obvious.

Moreover, Spengler failed to perceive in the idea of ﬁnality
of prophethood in Islam, ‘a psychological cure for the
Magian attitude of constant expectation’.  It should be clear
to any body that with  the ‘revelation’  of this idea of ﬁnality,
one of the greatest that dawned upon the  prophetic
consciousness, ‘all personal authority claiming a
supernatural origin came to an end in the history  of man’.

8
Spengler also failed to appreciate the cultural value of this
idea in Islam. With all his ‘overwhelming learning’,  it
perhaps did not become possible for him to comprehend the
all-important truth  that ‘the  constant appeal to reason and
experience in the Qur’«n, and the emphasis that it  lays on
Nature and History as sources of human knowledge are . . .
diﬀerent aspects of the same idea of ﬁnality’.  It is these
aspects of the idea of ﬁnality which bring  to man, indeed, a
keen awareness of the ‘birth’ of a new epoch with Islam, the
epoch ‘of inductive intellect’. 
The fact that none of the works of the Western writers
quoted from in the Reconstruction crosses 1928 as its date
of publication does not make much of a problem so far as
the ﬁrst six Lectures are concerned. One has only to recall
that the ﬁrst  three Lectures were written or ﬁnally  re-written
in 1928, and the next three in 1929,  mostly perhaps during
the summer vacations of the Courts. It is quite likely  that at
the time of writing  the second set of three lectures in 1929,
Allama Iqbal did not come across many works published in
the West the same year, or did not ﬁnd anything in  them to
quote from in his Lectures. But the last Lecture in the
present work: ‘Is Religion Possible?’ was delivered in a
session of the Aristotelian Society, London, in December
1932; and yet all the six Western works quoted from, even
in this Lecture, happen to have been published within 1928.
How is one to understand Allama’s not keeping up his usual
keenly perceptive and reportedly avid reading of the
Western philosophers?

Why this almost an ascetic self-denial of philosophy? There
could be many reasons for this. Among these, due
allowance has to be made for his preoccupation of two
diﬀerent orders: one which suited his superb poetic genius
most; and the other, of more practical  nature, which
increasingly took possession of his time and attention
towards guiding and helping the Muslims of India in their

9
great struggle for an autonomous homeland. Allama Iqbal
all along keenly felt that  Islam was to have an opportunity
‘to mobilize its law, its  education, its culture, and to bring
them into closer contact with  its own original spirit  and with
the spirit of modern times’  (Speeches, Writings and
Statements of Iqbal, p. 11). From the depth of these feelings
there emerged a prophetic vision of a geographical form  -
now called Pakistan.

As stated above Allama’s avowed main purpose in his
Lectures is ‘to secure a vision of the spirit of Islam as
emancipated from its Magian overlayings’ (p. 114).  There is,
however, not much mention of Magianism, nor of the
speciﬁc Magian overlayings of Islam, in the Reconstruction.
In all there is a brief reference to Magian culture in the
opening section of Lecture IV and to Magian idea or thought
in the concluding passage of Lecture V. In the latter case
Allama’s statement that  Ibn Khaldën has ‘ﬁnally demolished
the alleged revelational basis in Islam of an idea similar . . .
to the original Magian idea’ (p. 115) is an implied  and may
be somewhat suppressed reference to his view that ‘all
prophetic traditions relating  to mahdâ, masihiyat and
mujaddidiyyat are Magian in both provenance and spirit’
(Iqb«l N«mah, II, 231). It may be rightly said that  Allama’s
whole Weltanschauung is so completely anti-Magian that he
does not always have to name Magianism whenever he says
something which implies anti-Magianism. A good instance of
this, perhaps, would be his observation in Lecture VII on the
‘technique’ of medieval  mysticism in the Muslim East. ‘Far
from reintegrating  the forces of the average man’s inner
life, and thus preparing him for  participation in the  march of
history’, this Muslim mysticism,  he tells us, ‘has taught man
a false renunciation and made him perfectly  contented with
his ignorance and spiritual thraldom’  (pp. 148-49).

10
It remains, however, true that there  are not very many
statements in the Reconstruction even with Allama’s implied
anti-Magianism, unless we understand the expressions
‘implied’ and ‘implication’  in a diﬀerent  and deeper sense,
and go to the very starting-point  or genesis of his anti-
Magianism. As is the case with most of his other great and
rare insights - generally couched in a language diﬀerent
from that of Bergsonian-Whiteheadian metaphysics, Allama
owes his anti-Magianism to his uniquely perceptive reading
of the Qur’«n. It essentially emanates from his keen
understanding of the profound signiﬁcance of the supreme
idea of ﬁnality of prophethood looked at from  the point of
view of religious and cultural growth of  man in history, and
even thus, looked at also from the point of view of ‘man’s
achieving full self-consciousness’ as bearer of the ‘Divine
trust’ of ‘personality’  (ego) and of the ‘Divine  promise’ of a
complete subjugation of all this immensity  of space and
time’. With this Prophetic idea of the perfection  and thereby
the completion of the chain of all Divinelyrevealed  religions
in Islam, says Allama: ‘all personal authority, claiming a
supernatural origin, has come to an end in the history of
man’ (p. 101). But then from the  same supreme idea also
emanates the keen awareness of the epochal ‘birth of
inductive intellect’,  summed up in Allama’s well-known
aphorism. ‘Birth of Islam is the birth  of inductive intellect’
(p. 101). Added to this is his observation, characterized by
the same simplicity and directness of ‘perception’:  ‘In the
Prophet of Islam, life discovers other sources of knowledge
suitable to its new direction’  (p. 101). Thus, ‘abolition of all
Magian claims’ and ‘the birth of inductive  intellect’,  within
the logic of Islamic experience, are two co-implicant ideas,
for they owe their origin  to the same supreme idea of
ﬁnality and from it  they draw their common inspiration.

Because of the veritable inner unity of the  Qur’«n, man’s
new awareness of himself with regard to both his place in

11
Nature and his position in History awakened by ‘the idea of
ﬁnality’  is already clearly reﬂected in ‘the  emphasis that the
Qur’«n lays on Nature and History as sources of human
knowledge’. The latter, according to the  Allama, is only one
of the other aspects of the former;  as is also ‘the constant
appeal to reason and experience in the Qur’«n’. Thus, ‘the
birth of inductive  intellect’ is to  be found in the Qur’«n in
more than one way; and, therefore, in as many ways is to be
found also the repudiation of Magianism inherently  implied
by it. This explains largely, perhaps, Allama’s having taken
up in the Reconstruction the methodological device of
removing the Magian crust from Islam by promoting,  from
within Islam, its own intrinsic  awareness of the birth of
inductive intellect.  This is borne out by many of the
brightest parts of the  present work.

Some of the perceptive Western readers of the
Reconstruction have correctly noticed in Allama’s idea of
‘the birth  or awakening of inductive intellect’  a middle term
between ‘Islam’ and ‘modern science’, even as one is also
to notice Allama’s bracketing ‘science’ with
‘Godconsciousness’ - more precious than mere belief in God,
in some of his extraordinary pronouncements. These appear
sometimes, suddenly as if, in the concluding part of  an
argument as spontaneous expressions of an essential
aspect of that argument’s  inner impulse, which seems to
have become a little more heightened  in the end. Such are
the pronouncements, for instance, in which the Allama
equates the scientist’s observation of Nature with
someone’s ‘virtually seeking a kind of intimacy  with the
Absolute Ego’ (p. 45) or where he calls ‘the scientiﬁc
observer of Nature,’ ‘a kind of mystic  seeker in the act of
prayer’ (p. 73). Making this matter  of ‘God-consciousness-
through-science’ more explicit, he tells  us that ‘scientiﬁc
observation of Nature keeps us in close contact with the
behaviour of Reality, and thus sharpens our inner perception

12
for a deeper vision of it’ (p.  72), or that ‘one indirect  way of
establishing connexions with the reality  that confronts us is
reﬂective observation and control  of its symbols as they
reveal themselves to sense-perception’ (p. 12). So sure is
Allama of the near at hand possibilities of the scientiﬁc
observer’s ‘establishing connexions with Reality’ through  his
following the ‘modest’  ways of inductive intellect  that he
signiﬁcantly concludes: ‘This alone will add to his power
over Nature and give him that  vision of the total-inﬁnite
which philosophy seeks but cannot ﬁnd’ (p. 73).

The Reconstruction, however, cannot be said to be a critique
of Magian supernaturalism, nor, perhaps, is it altogether a
dissertation on Islamic awareness of inductive intellect,  or
on Islam’s saying ‘yes’ to the world of  matter and the
unique emphasis that it lays on the  empirical aspect of
Reality, and thence on science and on power over Nature.
All these do get their due place in Allama’s work, but  they
also get their share of criticism in  the philosophically
conceived total religio-moral synthesis of Islam. In fact,  the
exigency of the writing  of the major part of the
Reconstruction seems to have arisen, among other things,
out of a state of despair into which Muslim religio-
philosophic tradition had fallen, apparently,  out of sheer
neglect over the ages. Muslims in the end were, thus, left
with what the Allama has described ‘a worn-out’  or
‘practically a dead metaphysics’ with  its peculiar thought-
forms and set phraseology producing manifestly ‘a
deadening eﬀect on the modern mind’  (pp. 72, 78). The
need for writing a new Muslim metaphysics could not be
overemphasized; and the Allama wrote one in the
Reconstruction in terms of contemporary developments in
science and philosophy. This he hoped would ‘be helpful
towards a proper understanding of the meaning of  Islam as
a message to humanity’ (p. 7). Allama’s hope came true.
The Reconstruction is one of the very few precious Muslim

13
works available today for a meaningful discourse on Islam at
the international forum  of learning. Even thus it is unique in
promoting eﬀective  interreligious dialogue, provided the
‘metaphysics’ at least of  the major world religions are got
similarly translated into  the common idiom and metaphor of
today. The Reconstruction certainly also aims at greatly
facilitating the  much-needed inner communication between
Islam and ‘some of the most important  phases of its culture,
on its intellectual side’  (p. 6), which now, with the passage
of time, have come to be manifested in  many human
disciplines rapidly progressing all over the world. Promotion
of Islam’s communication with its  own manifestations
elsewhere is, perhaps, today, historically speaking, an
indispensable part of Muslims’ own ‘proper understanding of
the meaning of Islam’.

While preparing the script of the Reconstruction for its
present edition I have used basically its Oxford University
Press edition of 1934. The few misprints of the proper
names like Maimmonides, Rongier, Tawfâk Fitrat - which
seem to have been transferred to the Oxford edition  of the
Reconstruction from its poorly printed original  Lahore (Kapur
Art Printing Works) edition of 1930 - were pointed out by
some of the earlier Western reviewers. None of these
misprints, however, posed much of a problem except one,
which, I confess, put me on real hard work. I mean:
‘Sarkashâ of the tenth century of the  Hijrah, a misprint of
composite nature relating to  both name and date. The
French, the Urdu and the Persian translators of the
Reconstruction have noted it as a misprint for ‘Sarakhsi`of
the ﬁfth century  of the Hijrah’ - a bit  too commonly known a
name and date to steal into a composite misprint  in the
Reconstruction; and then the date certainly  a bit
anachronistic for the passage where it is meant to go. After
arriving at, what I may  be allowed to call, my foolproof
reasons and authenticated evidence with regard to this

14
misprint in name and date, I decided to  change it into
Zarkashâ of the eighth century of the  Hijrah with a long note
to this name.

As to my primary task of tracing  the passages quoted in the
Reconstruction to their originals in the Muslim or Western
writers, I am to say that  I did ﬁnally succeed in ﬁnding them
out except four, i.e. those quoted from  Horten, Hurgronje,
von Kremer and Said Halâm P«sh«. All these passages
belong to Lecture VI. This Lecture, as I have adduced some
evidence to show in my Notes, is justly believed to be the
revised and enlarged form of a paper on Ijtih«d read by
Allama Iqbal in December 1924. After all my search for the
so far four untraced passages in the possible works which
could become available to me, I am inclined to assume that
they are Allama’s own translations from German works.
Allama’s translation of two passages from Friedrich
Naumann’s Briefe ü ber Religion and ﬁve passages from
August Fischer’s Aus der religiö sen Reformbewegung in der
Tü rkei in Lecture VI, earlier paper on Ijtih«d and his past
practice of quoting from  German works in The Development
of Metaphysics in Persia as well as his correspondence with
some of the noted German and other orientalists are among
the additional reasons for this assumption.

As to the passages which have been quoted in Lecture VI
and could be traced to their originals,  there are good
reasons to believe that all the three  passages quoted from
Nicolas Aghnides’ Mohammedan Theories of Finance (a copy
of which was presented to the Allama in March-April 1923),
in the latter  part of this Lecture, belong to the period  of
Allama’s writing his paper on the ‘Idea of Ijtih«d  in the Law
of Islam’ in 1924. This also seems to be true of Ziya Gö
kalp’s poems translated by the Allama from Aus der religiö
sen Reformbewegung in der Turkei (1922) a copy of which
he did receive in April 1924 from the author,  August Fischer,

15
then also the editor of Islamica. In one of his letters  to
Sayyid Sulaim«n Nadvâ, the Allama clearly refers to his
having made use of Ziya Gö kalp’s poems in his paper on
Ijtih«d. There are, however, at least two passages which,
with some good measure of certainty, can be said to belong
to later dates. I mean the passage in the beginning  of
Lecture VI from Denison’s Emotion as the Basis of
Civilization, published in 1928; and, secondly, the passage
from al-Àujjat All«h al-B«lighah which, as stated earlier, is to
be linked with Allama’s letter  to Sayyid Sulaim«n Nadvâ on
22 September 1929.

Composition of Lecture VI, thus, appears to be spread over a
longer period of time than  is the case with other Lectures;
even as Allama’s interest in the ‘idea of Ijtih«d  in the Law of
Islam’ and thereby in the entire  methodology of Muslim
jurisprudence - recurrently visible in the  last ﬁfteen years of
his life - is much more sustained than his interest in  many
other subjects, including a good many that  he came across
in his avid and vast reading of the great  Western
philosophers.

In a press interview, a little before  the second Round Table
Conference, the Allama expressed his intention of writing a
book on ‘the system of ﬁqh in  the light of modern
knowledge’, another ‘work of reconstruction’  on the legal
aspect of Islam, much more important than  its purely
theological aspect. To this second work of reconstruction, his
present work of reconstruction on the philosophical aspect
of Islam, he added with his usual modesty, was ‘necessary
as a prelude’. The much cherished book: ‘The
Reconstruction of Legal Thought in Islam’ was, however, not
written: but  the bare fact that  the Allama wanted to write it
and the great importance that  he attached to the  writing of
it, signiﬁes, perhaps, his will to posterity.

16
In working out references to the views of many authors -
Islamic or Western, medieval or modern - cited in the
present work, or in providing notes to some of the points
raised or names and terms mentioned in it, I sincerely
believe that, though I have reaped a rich academic harvest
of my work, I have done only what any other admirer  and
lover of Allama Iqbal would have done, and done it better.

From an almost encyclopedic range of views and facts
covered in the Reconstruction as also from the pre-
eminently towering intellectual  and spiritual stature  of
Allama Iqbal, it should not be diﬃcult  to imagine that the
production of an annotated edition of this  work could not
have become possible for me without the kindly assistance
and advice of many friends and scholars both in Pakistan
and abroad. I most sincerely acknowledge my debt to them
all.

I owe a special debt of gratitude to Chief Justice Dr. J«vid
Iqbal for his kindly agreeing to the proposal of bringing  out
an annotated edition of the Reconstruction and also for
granting permission for its publication.  I am also grateful to
the members of the Board of Directors of the Institute  of
Islamic Culture, Lahore, for their approval of my undertaking
this work as one of my academic assignments in partial
fulﬁlment of my  duties as Director of the Institute,  and
especially to Dr. M. Afzal, Minister for Education, for his kind
encouragement and sustained keen interest in its
publication.

It is my most pleasant duty to  thank Professor M. Âiddâq of
Islamia College, Lahore, for his many courtesies and
generous assistance in the use of Allama Iqbal’s personal
library and particularly  for his expert advice in the matter  of
locating and reading Allama’s marginal and other marks and
notes in his personal copies of many important works.

17
My grateful thanks are also due to Dr. AÁmad Nabâ Kh«n,
Director: Archaeology, and his junior colleague Mr. M. H.
Khokhar, Curator: Allama Iqbal Museum, Lahore, for their
special courtesy which made it possible for me to examine
and study some of the important  MSS and books preserved
in this Museum and especially the letters of the  orientalists.
This did help me solve some of my riddles.

I am gratefully indebted  to Q«zâ Mahmëdul Haq of the
British Library, London, for his kindly sending me the
photostat of Allama Iqbal’s article  published in the ﬁrst issue
of Sociological Review (1908), and also of sections from
Denison’s, now a rare book, Emotion as the Basis of
Civilization. In addition Mr. Haq very kindly arranged to send
to me microﬁlms of certain  MSS in Cairo including the
unique MSS of Khw«jah Muhammad P«rsa’s Ris«lah dar
Zam«n-o-Mak«n. Thus alone did it become possible for me
to work out some diﬃcult,  if not impossible, references in
the Reconstruction.

I also wish to express my gratitude to Mlle Mauricette
Levasseur of Bibliothè que Nationale, Paris, for her kindly
supplying me the requested information  on Andrè Servier,
and more importantly  for her detailed notes on Louis
Rougier (earlier Rongier) which helped me work through a
somewhat tangled problem of names and titles.

My very grateful thanks are due to the  two Dutch friends:
the Reverend Dr. Jan Slomp and Mr. Harry Mintjes. The
former was never tired of translating  for me passages from
articles and books in German or French, for the information
requested by me sometimes was to become available only
in these languages. And it was Mr. Mintjes who ﬁnally made
it possible for me to have the photostat  of the passages
from Naumann’s Briefe ü ber Religion quoted in the
Reconstruction.

18
I must also thank my nephew, Professor Dr. Mustansir Mir of
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, for his ready supply
of photostats of this or that  article, or of parts of books, or
more importantly  of a new dissertation on Allama Iqbal in
the States.

Of the many more friends and scholars who have kindly
helped me in my work or from whose views I have beneﬁted
in one way or the other, mention  must be made of
Maul«n«M. Àanâf Nadvâ and Maul«n« M. Ish«q Bhattâ`. I
met them almost daily  in the oﬃce of the Institute  of Islamic
Culture, and it was always so convenient to take some
signiﬁcant Arabic texts to them  and enter into a lively
discussion on this or that Islamic issue touched upon in the
Reconstruction. I am ever so grateful to them for all  these
discussions.

I must also acknowledge my great indebtedness to Mr. M.
Ashraf D«r, Secretary and Publication Adviser of the
Institute, for his kindly  preparing the entire manuscript  for
press, for his many valuable suggestions and technical
assistance in the diﬃcult task of  preparing the two Indexes -
particularly the  second, which, in fact, has grown unto
index-cumconcordance - and ﬁnally for reading and
correcting proofs of the latter  part of the work, i.e. the
editor’s part starting  with his Notes and References.

Nobody is more conscious of the many drawbacks in this
latter part  than I, and, for that very  reason, none so eager to
welcome the suggestions of the worthy reader to  improve
upon it, for the next  edition.

Even so, I would like to dedicate this part of the work by  the
editor to the memories  of the late Chief Justice S. A. Rahman
and the late Maul«n« Sa‘âd Ahmad Akbar«b«dâ, the two
Iqbalites, who helped me understand ‘the great  synthesis,

19
the greatest in the modern Muslim world’  that Allama Iqbal
is. May their souls rest in eternal peace!

Lahore:  1984  M.S.S.
PREFACE

The Qur’«n is a book which emphasizes ‘deed’ rather than
‘idea’. There are, however, men to whom it is not possible
organically to assimilate an alien universe by re-living,  as a
vital process, that special type of inner experience on which
religious faith ultimately  rests. Moreover, the modern man,
by developing habits of concrete thought - habits  which
Islam itself fostered at least in the earlier  stages of its
cultural career - has rendered himself less capable of that
experience which he further suspects because of its liability
to illusion. The more genuine schools of Suﬁsm have, no
doubt, done good work in shaping and directing the
evolution of religious experience in Islam; but their  latter-
day representatives, owing to their ignorance of  the modern
mind, have become absolutely incapable of receiving any
fresh inspiration from modern thought  and experience. They
are perpetuating methods which were created for
generations possessing a cultural outlook diﬀering, in
important respects, from our own. ‘Your creation and
resurrection,’ says the Qur’«n, ‘are like the creation and
resurrection of a single soul.’ A living experience of the kind
of biological unity, embodied in this verse,  requires today a
method physiologically less violent and psychologically
more suitable to a concrete type of mind. In the  absence of
such a method the demand for a scientiﬁc form of  religious
knowledge is only natural. In these Lectures, which were
undertaken at the request of the Madras Muslim Association
and delivered at Madras, Hyderabad, and Aligarh, I have
tried to meet, even though  partially, this urgent  demand by
attempting to  reconstruct Muslim religious philosophy with
due regard to the philosophical traditions of Islam and the

20
more recent developments in the various domains of human
knowledge. And the present moment is quite favourable  for
such an undertaking. Classical Physics has learned to
criticize its own foundations. As a result of this criticism  the
kind of materialism, which it  originally necessitated, is
rapidly disappearing; and the day is not far  oﬀ when
Religion and Science may discover hitherto unsuspected
mutual harmonies. It must, however, be remembered  that
there is no such thing as ﬁnality in philosophical thinking.  As
knowledge advances and fresh avenues of thought are
opened, other views, and probably sounder views than
those set forth in these Lectures, are possible. Our duty is
carefully to watch the progress of human thought,  and to
maintain an independent critical  attitude towards  it.

Knowledge   and  Religious  Experience
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal

What is the character and general structure of  the universe
in which we live? Is there a permanent element in the
constitution of this  universe? How are we related to it? What
place do we occupy in it, and what is the kind of conduct
that beﬁts the  place we occupy? These questions are
common to religion, philosophy, and higher poetry. But the
kind of knowledge that poetic  inspiration brings is
essentially individual in its character;  it is ﬁgurative,  vague,
and indeﬁnite. Religion, in its more advanced forms, rises
higher than poetry. It moves from individual  to society. In its
attitude towards the  Ultimate Reality it is opposed to the
limitations of man;  it enlarges his claims and holds out the
prospect of nothing less than a direct vision of Reality. Is it
then possible to apply the purely rational  method of
philosophy to religion? The spirit of philosophy is one of free
inquiry. It suspects all authority. Its function is to trace  the
uncritical assumptions of human thought  to their hiding
places, and in this pursuit it may  ﬁnally end in denial or a

21
frank admission of the incapacity of pure reason to reach
the Ultimate Reality. The essence of religion, on the other
hand, is faith; and faith, like the  bird, sees its ‘trackless way’
unattended by intellect  which, in the words of the great
mystic poet of Islam, ‘only waylays the living  heart of man
and robs it of the invisible wealth of  life that lies within’.1 Yet
it cannot be denied that faith  is more than mere feeling. It
has something like a cognitive content, and the existence of
rival parties— scholastics and mystics— in the history of
religion shows that idea is a vital element in religion.  Apart
from this, religion on its doctrinal  side, as deﬁned by
Professor Whitehead, is ‘a system of general truths which
have the eﬀect of transforming  character when they are
sincerely held and vividly apprehended’.2 Now, since the
transformation and guidance of man’s inner and outer  life is
the essential aim of religion, it is obvious that  the general
truths which it embodies must  not remain unsettled. No one
would hazard action on the basis of a doubtful principle of
conduct. Indeed, in view of its function, religion  stands in
greater need of a rational foundation of its  ultimate
principles than even the dogmas of science. Science may
ignore a rational metaphysics; indeed, it has ignored it  so
far. Religion can hardly aﬀord to ignore the search for a
reconciliation of the oppositions of experience and a
justiﬁcation of the environment  in which humanity ﬁnds
itself. That is why Professor Whitehead has acutely
remarked that ‘the ages of faith  are the ages of
rationalism’.3 But to rationalize faith  is not to admit the
superiority of philosophy over religion. Philosophy, no doubt,
has jurisdiction to judge religion, but  what is to be judged is
of such a nature that it will  not submit to the  jurisdiction of
philosophy except on its own terms. While sitting in
judgement on religion, philosophy cannot give religion  an
inferior place among its data. Religion is not a departmental
aﬀair; it is neither  mere thought, nor mere feeling, nor  mere

22
action; it is an expression of the whole man. Thus, in the
evaluation of religion, philosophy must recognize the central
position of religion and has no other alternative  but to admit
it as something focal in the process of reﬂective synthesis.
Nor is there any reason to suppose that thought and
intuition are essentially opposed to each other. They spring
up from the same root and complement each other. The one
grasps Reality piecemeal, the other grasps it in its
wholeness. The one ﬁxes its gaze on the eternal, the other
on the temporal aspect of Reality. The one is present
enjoyment of the whole of Reality; the other  aims at
traversing the whole by slowly specifying and closing up the
various regions of the whole for exclusive observation. Both
are in need of each other for mutual rejuvenation.  Both seek
visions of the same Reality which reveals itself to them in
accordance with their function in life.  In fact, intuition,  as
Bergson rightly says, is only a higher kind of intellect.4

The search for rational foundations in Islam may be
regarded to have begun with the Prophet himself. His
constant prayer was: ‘God! grant me knowledge of the
ultimate nature of things!’5  The work of later mystics and
non-mystic rationalists forms an exceedingly instructive
chapter in the history of our culture,  inasmuch as it reveals
a longing for a coherent system of ideas, a spirit of whole-
hearted devotion to truth,  as well as the limitations of the
age, which rendered the various theological movements in
Islam less fruitful than they might  have been in a diﬀerent
age. As we all know, Greek philosophy has been a great
cultural force in the history  of Islam. Yet a careful study of
the Qur’«n and the various schools of scholastic theology
that arose under the inspiration of Greek thought  disclose
the remarkable fact that  while Greek philosophy very much
broadened the outlook of Muslim thinkers, it, on the  whole,
obscured their vision of the Qur’«n. Socrates concentrated
his attention on the human world  alone. To him the proper

23
study of man was man and not the world of plants, insects,
and stars. How unlike the spirit of the Qur’«n, which sees in
the humble bee a recipient of Divine inspiration6 and
constantly calls upon the reader to observe the perpetual
change of the winds, the alternation of day and night,  the
clouds,7 the starry heavens,8 and the planets swimming
through inﬁnite space!9 As a true disciple of Socrates, Plato
despised sense– perception which, in his view, yielded mere
opinion and no real knowledge.10 How unlike the Qur’«n,
which regards ‘hearing’ and ‘sight’  as the most valuable
Divine gifts11 and declares them to be accountable to God
for their activity  in this world.12 This is what the earlier
Muslim students of the Qur’«n completely missed under the
spell of classical speculation. They read the Qur’«n in the
light of Greek thought. It took them  over two hundred years
to perceive - though not quite clearly  - that the spirit  of the
Qur’«n was essentially anticlassical,13 and the result of this
perception was a kind of intellectual revolt,  the full
signiﬁcance of which has not been realized even up to the
present day. It was partly owing to this revolt and partly  to
his personal history that Ghaz«lâ based religion on
philosophical scepticism - a rather unsafe basis for religion
and not wholly justiﬁed by the  spirit of the Qur’«n. Ghaz«lâ’s
chief opponent, Ibn Rushd, who defended Greek philosophy
against the rebels, was led, through Aristotle, to what  is
known as the doctrine of Immortality  of Active Intellect,14 a
doctrine which once wielded enormous inﬂuence on the
intellectual life of France and Italy,15 but which, to my mind,
is entirely opposed to the view that  the Qur’«n takes of the
value and destiny of the human ego.16 Thus Ibn Rushd lost
sight of a great and fruitful  idea in Islam and unwittingly
helped the growth of that  enervating philosophy of life
which obscures man’s vision of himself, his God, and his
world. The more constructive among the Ash‘arite thinkers
were no doubt on the right path and anticipated  some of the

24
more modern forms of Idealism; yet, on the whole, the
object of the Ash‘arite movement was simply  to defend
orthodox opinion with the weapons of Greek dialectic. The
Mu‘tazilah, conceiving religion merely as a body of doctrines
and ignoring it as a vital fact, took  no notice of non-
conceptual modes of approaching Reality and reduced
religion to a mere system of logical concepts ending in a
purely negative attitude.  They failed to see that in the
domain of knowledge - scientiﬁc or religious - complete
independence of thought from concrete experience is not
possible.

It cannot, however, be denied that Ghaz«lâ’s mission was
almost apostolic like that of Kant in Germany of the
eighteenth century. In Germany rationalism appeared as an
ally of religion, but she soon realized that the dogmatic  side
of religion was incapable of demonstration. The only course
open to her was to eliminate dogma from the  sacred record.
With the elimination of dogma came the utilitarian  view of
morality, and thus rationalism  completed the reign of
unbelief. Such was the state of theological thought in
Germany when Kant appeared. His Critique of Pure Reason
revealed the limitations of human  reason and reduced the
whole work of the rationalists to a heap of ruins. And justly
has he been described as God’s greatest gift to his country.
Ghaz«lâ’s philosophical scepticism which, however, went a
little too far,  virtually did the  same kind of work in the world
of Islam in breaking the back of that proud but  shallow
rationalism which moved in the same direction  as pre-
Kantian rationalism in Germany. There is, however, one
important diﬀerence between  Ghaz«lâ’s and Kant. Kant,
consistently with his principles, could not aﬃrm  the
possibility of a knowledge of God. Ghaz«lâ’s, ﬁnding no
hope in analytic thought, moved to  mystic experience, and
there found an independent content for  religion. In this way
he succeeded in securing for religion the right to exist

25
independently of science and metaphysics. But the
revelation of the total  Inﬁnite in mystic experience
convinced him of the ﬁnitude and inconclusiveness of
thought and drove him to draw a line  of cleavage between
thought and intuition.  He failed to see that thought  and
intuition are organically related  and that thought must
necessarily simulate ﬁnitude and inconclusiveness because
of its alliance with serial time.  The idea that thought is
essentially ﬁnite, and for this reason unable to capture  the
Inﬁnite, is based on a mistaken notion of the movement  of
thought in knowledge. It is the inadequacy of the  logical
understanding which ﬁnds a multiplicity  of mutually
repellent individualities with  no prospect of their ultimate
reduction to a unity that  makes us sceptical about the
conclusiveness of thought. In fact, the logical understanding
is incapable of seeing this multiplicity  as a coherent
universe. Its only method is generalization based on
resemblances, but its generalizations are only ﬁctitious
unities which do not aﬀect the reality  of concrete things. In
its deeper movement, however, thought  is capable of
reaching an immanent Inﬁnite in whose self-unfolding
movement the various ﬁnite  concepts are merely moments.
In its essential nature, then, thought  is not static; it is
dynamic and unfolds its internal inﬁnitude  in time like the
seed which, from the very beginning, carries within  itself the
organic unity of the tree as a present fact.  Thought is,
therefore, the whole in its dynamic self-expression,
appearing to the temporal vision as a series of deﬁnite
speciﬁcations which cannot be understood except by a
reciprocal reference. Their meaning lies not in their self-
identity, but in  the larger whole of which they are the
speciﬁc aspects. This larger whole is to use a Qur’anic
metaphor, a kind of ‘Preserved Tablet’,17 which holds up the
entire undetermined possibilities of knowledge as a present
reality, revealing itself in  serial time as a succession of ﬁnite

26
concepts appearing to reach a unity which is already
present in them. It is in fact the  presence of the total Inﬁnite
in the movement of knowledge that  makes ﬁnite thinking
possible. Both Kant and Ghaz«lâ’s failed to see that thought,
in the very act of knowledge, passes beyond its own
ﬁnitude. The ﬁnitudes of Nature are reciprocally exclusive.
Not so the ﬁnitudes of thought which is, in its  essential
nature, incapable of limitation  and cannot remain
imprisoned in the narrow circuit of its  own individuality. In
the wide world beyond itself nothing  is alien to it. It is in its
progressive participation in the life of  the apparently alien
that thought demolishes the walls of  its ﬁnitude and enjoys
its potential inﬁnitude.  Its movement becomes possible only
because of the implicit presence in its ﬁnite  individuality of
the inﬁnite, which keeps alive within  it the ﬂame of
aspiration and sustains it in its endless pursuit. It is a
mistake to regard thought as inconclusive, for it  too, in its
own way, is a greeting of the ﬁnite with  the inﬁnite.

During the last ﬁve hundred years religious thought  in Islam
has been practically stationary. There was a time when
European thought received inspiration from the world of
Islam. The most remarkable phenomenon of modern history,
however, is the enormous rapidity with  which the world of
Islam is spiritually moving towards the West. There is
nothing wrong in this movement,  for European culture, on
its intellectual side, is only a further  development of some of
the most important  phases of the culture of Islam. Our only
fear is that the dazzling exterior  of European culture may
arrest our movement and we may fail to reach the  true
inwardness of that culture. During all the centuries  of our
intellectual stupor Europe has been seriously thinking on the
great problems in which the philosophers and scientists of
Islam were so keenly interested. Since the Middle Ages,
when the schools of Muslim theology were completed,
inﬁnite advance has taken place in the domain of human

27
thought and experience. The extension of man’s power over
Nature has given him a new faith and a fresh sense of
superiority over the forces that  constitute his environment.
New points of view have been suggested, old problems have
been re-stated in the light of fresh experience, and new
problems have arisen. It seems as if the intellect of man is
outgrowing its own most fundamental  categories - time,
space, and causality. With the advance of scientiﬁc thought
even our concept of intelligibility  is undergoing a change.18
The theory of Einstein has brought a new vision of the
universe and suggests new ways of looking at the problems
common to both religion and philosophy. No wonder then
that the younger generation  of Islam in Asia and Africa
demand a fresh orientation of their faith.  With the
reawakening of Islam, therefore, it is necessary to examine,
in an independent spirit, what Europe has thought and how
far the conclusions reached by her can help us in the
revision and, if necessary, reconstruction, of theological
thought in Islam. Besides this it is not possible to ignore
generally anti-religious and especially anti-Islamic
propaganda in Central Asia which has already crossed the
Indian frontier. Some of the apostles of this movement are
born Muslims, and one of them, Tewfâk Fikret, the Turkish
poet, who died only a short time ago,19 has gone to the
extent of using our great poet-thinker,  Mirz« ‘Abd al-Q«dir
Bedil of Akbar«b«d, for the purposes of this movement.
Surely, it is high time to look to the  essentials of Islam. In
these lectures I propose to undertake a philosophical
discussion of some of the basic of ideas of Islam, in the hope
that this may, at least,  be helpful towards a proper
understanding of the meaning of Islam as a message to
humanity. Also with a view to give a kind of ground-outline
for further discussion, I propose, in this preliminary lecture,
to consider the character of knowledge and religious
experience.

28
The main purpose of the Qur’«n is to awaken in man the
higher consciousness of his manifold relations with God and
the universe. It is in view of this essential aspect of the
Quranic teaching that Goethe, while making a general
review of Islam as an educational force, said to Eckermann:
‘You see this teaching never fails; with all our systems, we
cannot go, and generally speaking no man can go, farther
than that.’20 The problem of Islam was really suggested by
the mutual conﬂict, and at  the same time mutual attraction,
presented by the two forces of religion and civilization.  The
same problem confronted early Christianity. The great point
in Christianity is the search for an independent content  for
spiritual life which, according to the  insight of its founder,
could be elevated, not by the forces of a world external  to
the soul of man, but by the revelation  of a new world within
his soul. Islam fully agrees with this insight and supplements
it by the further  insight that the  illumination of the  new
world thus revealed is not something foreign to  the world of
matter but permeates it  through and through.

Thus the aﬃrmation of spirit sought  by Christianity would
come not by the renunciation of external  forces which are
already permeated by the illumination  of spirit, but by  a
proper adjustment of man’s relation  to these forces in view
of the light received from the  world within. It is the
mysterious touch of the ideal that  animates and sustains
the real, and through it alone we can discover and aﬃrm  the
ideal. With Islam the ideal and the real are not two opposing
forces which cannot be reconciled. The life of the ideal
consists, not in a total breach with the real  which would
tend to shatter the organic  wholeness of life into painful
oppositions, but in the perpetual endeavour of the  ideal to
appropriate the real with a view eventually  to absorb it, to
convert it into itself  and illuminate its whole being.  It is the
sharp opposition between the subject and the object, the
mathematical without  and the biological within, that

29
impressed Christianity. Islam, however, faces the opposition
with a view to overcome it. This essential diﬀerence in
looking at a fundamental relation  determines the respective
attitudes of these great religions towards  the problem of
human life in its present surroundings. Both demand the
aﬃrmation of the spiritual  self in man, with this  diﬀerence
only that Islam, recognizing the contact of  the ideal with the
real, says ‘yes’ to the world of matter21 and points the way
to master it with  a view to discover a basis for a realistic
regulation of life.

What, then, according to the Qur’«n, is the character of the
universe which we inhabit? In the ﬁrst place, it  is not the
result of a mere creative sport:

‘We have not created the Heavens and the earth and
whatever is between them in sport. We have not created
them but for a serious end: but the  greater part of them
understand it not’ (44:38-39).22

It is a reality to be reckoned with:

‘Verily in the creation of the Heavens and of the earth, and
in the succession of the night and of the day, are signs for
men of understanding; who, standing and sitting  and
reclining, bear God in mind and reﬂect on the creation of the
Heavens and of the earth, and say: "Oh, our Lord! Thou hast
not created this in vain" (3:190-91).

Again the universe is so constituted that it  is capable of
extension:
 ‘He (God) adds to His creation what He wills’ (35:1).23
 It is not a block universe, a ﬁnished product, immobile and
incapable of change. Deep in its inner being lies, perhaps,
the dream of a new birth:
 

30
‘Say - go through the earth and see how God hath brought
forth all creation; hereafter  will He give it another birth’
(29:20).

In fact, this mysterious swing and impulse of the universe,
this noiseless swim of time which appears to us, human
beings, as the movement of day and night, is regarded by
the Qur’«n as one of the greatest signs of God:

‘God causeth the day and the night to take their  turn. Verily
in this is teaching for men of insight’  (24:44).

This is why the Prophet said: ‘Do not vilify time, for time  is
God.’24 And this immensity of time and space carries in it
the promise of a complete subjugation by man whose duty
is to reﬂect on the signs of God, and thus discover the
means of realizing his conquest of Nature as an actual fact:

‘See ye not how God hath put under you all that is in the
Heavens, and all that is on the earth, and hath been
bounteous to you of His favours both in relation to the  seen
and the unseen?’ (31:20).

‘And He hath subjected to you the night and the day,  the
sun and the moon, and the stars too are subject to you by
His behest; verily in this are signs for those who understand’
(16:12).

Such being the nature and promise of the universe, what is
the nature of man whom it confronts  on all sides? Endowed
with a most suitable mutual adjustment  of faculties he
discovers himself down below in the scale of life,
surrounded on all sides by the forces of obstruction: 
‘That of goodliest fabric We created man, then brought him
down to the lowest of the low’ (95:4-5).

31
And how do we ﬁnd him in this environment? A ‘restless’25
being engrossed in his ideals to the point of forgetting
everything else, capable of inﬂicting pain  on himself in his
ceaseless quest after fresh scopes for self-expression. With
all his failings he is superior to Nature, inasmuch as he
carries within him a great trust  which, in the words of the
Qur’«n, the heavens and the earth and the mountains
refused to carry:

‘Verily We proposed to the Heavens and to the earth and to
the mountains to receive the trust  (of personality), but  they
refused the burden and they feared to receive it.  Man alone
undertook to bear it, but  hath proved unjust, senseless!’
(33:72).

His career, no doubt, has a beginning, but he is destined,
perhaps, to become a permanent element in the
constitution of being.

‘Thinketh man that he shall be thrown away as an object of
no use? Was he not a mere embryo? Then he became thick
blood of which God formed him and fashioned him, and
made him twain, male and female. Is not He powerful
enough to quicken the dead?’ (75:36-40).

When attracted by the forces around him, man has the
power to shape and direct them; when thwarted  by them,
he has the capacity to build a much vaster world in the
depths of his own inner being, wherein he discovers sources
of inﬁnite joy and inspiration.  Hard his lot and frail his being,
like a rose-leaf, yet no form of reality is so powerful, so
inspiring, and so beautiful as the spirit of man!  Thus in his
inmost being man, as conceived by the Qur’«n, is a creative
activity, an ascending spirit who, in his onward march, rises
from one state of being to another:

32
‘But Nay! I swear by the sunset’s redness and by the night
and its gatherings and by the moon when at her full,  that
from state to state shall ye be surely carried  onward’ (84:16-
19).

It is the lot of man to share in the  deeper aspirations of the
universe around him and to shape his own destiny as well as
that of the universe, now by adjusting  himself to its forces,
now by putting the whole of his energy to  mould its forces
to his own ends and purposes. And in this process of
progressive change God becomes a co-worker with him,
provided man takes the initiative:

‘Verily God will not change the condition of men, till  they
change what is in themselves’ (13:11).

If he does not take the initiative,  if he does not evolve the
inner richness of his being, if he ceases to feel the inward
push of advancing life, then the spirit  within him hardens
into stone and he is reduced to the level of dead matter.  But
his life and the onward march of his spirit depend on the
establishment of connexions with the reality  that confronts
him.26 It is knowledge that establishes these connexions,
and knowledge is sense-perception elaborated by
understanding.

‘When thy Lord said to the Angels, "Verily I am about to
place one in my stead on earth," they said, "Wilt  Thou place
there one who will do ill and shed blood, when we celebrate
Thy praise and extol Thy holiness?" God said, "Verily I know
what ye know not!" And He taught Adam the names of all
things, and then set them before the  Angels, and said, "Tell
me the names of these if ye are endowed with wisdom."
They said, "Praise be to Thee! We have no knowledge but
what Thou hast given us to know. Thou art the Knowing, the
Wise". He said, "O Adam, inform them of the names." And

33
when he had informed them of the names, God said, "Did I
not say to you that I know the hidden things  of the Heavens
and of the earth, and that I know what  ye bring to light and
what ye hide?" (2:30-33).

The point of these verses is that man is endowed with the
faculty of naming things, that  is to say, forming concepts of
them, and forming concepts of them is capturing  them.
Thus the character of man’s knowledge is conceptual, and it
is with the weapon of this conceptual knowledge that  man
approaches the observable aspect of Reality. The one
noteworthy feature of the  Qur’«n is the emphasis that it lays
on this observable aspect of Reality. Let me quote here a
few verses:

‘Assuredly, in the creation of the Heavens and of the earth;
and in the alternation of night  and day; and in the ships
which pass through the sea with what is useful to man; and
in the rain which God sendeth down from Heaven, giving life
to the earth after its  death, and scattering over it  all kinds of
cattle; and in the change of the winds, and in the  clouds
that are made to do service between the Heavens and the
earth - are signs for those who understand’ (2:164).

‘And it is He Who hath ordained for you that ye may be
guided thereby in the darkness of the land and of the  sea!
Clear have We made Our signs to men of knowledge. And it
is He Who hath created you of one breath, and hath
provided you an abode and resting place (in the womb).
Clear have We made Our signs for men of insight! And it is
He Who sendeth down rain from Heaven: and We bring forth
by it the buds of all the plants  and from them bring We forth
the green foliage, and the close-growing grain, and palm
trees with sheaths of clustering dates, and gardens of
grapes, and the olive, and the pomegranate, like and unlike.

34
Look you on their fruits when they ripen. Truly herein are
signs unto people who believe’ (6:97-99).

‘Hast thou not seen how thy Lord lengthens out the shadow?
Had He pleased He had made it motionless. But We made
the sun to be its guide; then draw it  in unto Us with easy in
drawing’ (25:45-46).

‘Can they not look up to the clouds, how they are created;
and to the Heaven how it is upraised; and to the mountains
how they are rooted, and to the earth how it  is outspread?’
(88:17-20).

‘And among His signs are the creation of the Heavens and of
the earth, and your variety  of tongues and colours. Herein
truly are signs for all men’ (30:22).

No doubt, the immediate purpose of the Qur’«n in this
reﬂective observation of Nature is to awaken in man the
consciousness of that of which Nature is regarded a symbol.
But the point to note is the  general empirical attitude  of the
Qur’«n which engendered in its followers a feeling of
reverence for the actual and ultimately  made them the
founders of modern science. It was a great point to awaken
the empirical spirit in an age which renounced the  visible as
of no value in men’s search after God. According to the
Qur’«n, as we have seen before, the universe has a serious
end. Its shifting actualities force our being into  fresh
formations. The intellectual eﬀort  to overcome the
obstruction oﬀered by it,  besides enriching and amplifying
our life, sharpens our insight, and thus prepares us for a
more masterful insertion into subtler  aspects of human
experience. It is our reﬂective contact with  the temporal ﬂux
of things which trains us for an intellectual  vision of the non-
temporal. Reality lives in its own appearances; and such a
being as man, who has to maintain his life in an obstructing

35
environment, cannot aﬀord to ignore  the visible. The Qur’«n
opens our eyes to the great fact of change, through the
appreciation and control of which alone it is possible to build
a durable civilization. The cultures of Asia and, in fact, of the
whole ancient world failed, because they approached Reality
exclusively from within and moved from  within outwards.
This procedure gave them theory without power, and on
mere theory no durable civilization can be based.

There is no doubt that the treatment  of religious experience,
as a source of Divine knowledge, is historically prior to the
treatment of other  regions of human experience for the
same purpose. The Qur’«n, recognizing that the empirical
attitude is an indispensable stage in the spiritual  life of
humanity, attaches equal importance to  all the regions of
human experience as yielding knowledge of the Ultimate
Reality which reveals its symbols both within and without.27
One indirect way of establishing connexions with the reality
that confronts us is reﬂective observation and control  of its
symbols as they reveal themselves to senseperception; the
other way is direct association with that  reality as it reveals
itself within. The naturalism of the  Qur’«n is only a
recognition of the fact that  man is related to nature, and this
relation, in view of its possibility  as a means of controlling
her forces, must be exploited not in the interest  of
unrighteous desire for domination, but in  the nobler interest
of a free upward movement of spiritual life.  In the interests
of securing a complete vision of Reality, therefore, sense-
perception must be supplemented by the perception  of what
the Qur’«n describes as Fu’«d or Qalb, i.e. heart:

‘God hath made everything which He hath created most
good; and began the creation of man with clay; then
ordained his progeny from germs of life, from sorry water;
then shaped him, and breathed of His spirit unto him, and

36
gave you hearing and seeing and heart: what little  thanks
do ye return?’ (32:7-9).

The ‘heart’ is a kind of inner intuition  or insight which, in the
beautiful words of Rëmâ, feeds on the rays of the sun and
brings us into contact with aspects of Reality other than
those open to sense-perception.28 It is, according to the
Qur’«n, something which ‘sees’, and its reports, if properly
interpreted, are never false.29 We must not, however, regard
it as a mysterious special faculty; it  is rather a mode of
dealing with Reality in which sensation, in the physiological
sense of the word, does not play any part.30 Yet the vista of
experience thus opened to us is as real and concrete as any
other experience. To describe it as psychic, mystical, or
super-natural does not detract from its value as experience.
To the primitive man all experience was super-natural.
Prompted by the immediate necessities of life he was driven
to interpret his experience, and out of  this interpretation
gradually emerged ‘Nature’ in our sense of the word. The
total-Reality, which enters our awareness and appears on
interpretation as an empirical fact,  has other ways of
invading our consciousness and oﬀers further opportunities
of interpretation. The revealed and mystic literature  of
mankind bears ample testimony to the  fact that religious
experience has been too enduring and dominant in the
history of mankind to be rejected as mere illusion. There
seems to be no reason, then, to accept the normal level of
human experience as fact and reject its other levels as
mystical and emotional. The fact of religious experience are
facts among other facts of human experience and, in the
capacity of yielding knowledge by interpretation,  one fact is
as good as another. Nor is there anything irreverent in
critically examining this  region of human experience. The
Prophet of Islam was the ﬁrst critical observer of psychic
phenomena. Bukha`ri`and other traditionists  have given us

37
a full account of his observation of the psychic Jewish youth,
Ibn Sayy«d, whose ecstatic moods attracted the Prophet’s
notice.31 He tested him, questioned him, and examined him
in his various moods. Once he hid himself behind the stem
of a tree to listen to  his mutterings. The boy’s mother,
however, warned him of the approach of the Prophet.
Thereupon the boy immediately shook oﬀ his mood and the
Prophet remarked: ‘If she had let him alone the thing would
have been cleared up.’32 The Prophet’s companions, some
of whom were present during the course of this ﬁrst
psychological observation in the history of  Islam, and even
later traditionists,  who took good care to record this
important fact,  entirely misunderstood the signiﬁcance of
his attitude and interpreted  it in their  own innocent manner.
Professor Macdonald, who seems to have no idea of the
fundamental psychological diﬀerence between the  mystic
and the prophetic consciousness, ﬁnds ‘humour enough in
this picture of one prophet trying  to investigate  another
after the method of  the Society for Psychical Research.33 A
better appreciation of the  spirit of the Qur’«n which, as I will
show in a subsequent lecture,34 initiated the cultural
movement terminating  in the birth  of the modern empirical
attitude, would have led  the Professor to see something
remarkably suggestive in the Prophet’s observation of the
psychic Jew. However, the ﬁrst Muslim to see the meaning
and value of the Prophet’s attitude was Ibn Khaldën, who
approached the contents of mystic consciousness in a more
critical spirit and very  nearly reached the modern
hypothesis of subliminal selves.35 As Professor Macdonald
says, Ibn Khaldën ‘had some most interesting psychological
ideas, and that he would probably have been in close
sympathy with Mr. William James's Varieties of Religious
Experience’.36 Modern psychology has only recently begun
to realize the importance of a careful study  of the contents
of mystic consciousness, and we are not yet in possession of

38
a really eﬀective scientiﬁc method  to analyse the contents
of non-rational modes of consciousness. With the time at my
disposal it is not possible to undertake an extensive inquiry
into the history and the various degrees of mystic
consciousness in point of richness and vividness. All that I
can do is to oﬀer a few general observations only on the
main characteristics of mystic experience.

1. The ﬁrst point to note is the immediacy  of this
experience. In this respect it does not diﬀer from  other
levels of human experience which supply data for
knowledge. All experience is immediate. As regions of
normal experience are subject to interpretation  of sense-
data for our knowledge of the external world,  so the region
of mystic experience is subject to interpretation  for our
knowledge of God. The immediacy of mystic experience
simply means that we know God just as we know other
objects. God is not a mathematical entity or a system  of
concepts mutually related to one another  and having no
reference to experience.37

2. The second point is the unanalysable wholeness of mystic
experience. When I experience the table before me,
innumerable data of experience merge into the  single
experience of the table. Out of this wealth of  data I select
those that fall into a certain  order of space and time and
round them oﬀ in reference to the  table. In the mystic state,
however, vivid and rich it may  be, thought is reduced to a
minimum and such an analysis is not possible. But this
diﬀerence of the mystic state  from the ordinary rational
consciousness does not mean discontinuance with the
normal consciousness, as Professor William James
erroneously thought. In either case it is the same Reality
which is operating on us. The ordinary rational
consciousness, in view of our practical need of adaptation to
our environment, takes that Reality piecemeal, selecting

39
successively isolated sets of stimuli for response. The mystic
state brings us into contact with  the total passage of Reality
in which all the diverse stimuli  merge into one another and
form a single unanalysable unity in which the ordinary
distinction of subject and object does not exist.

3. The third point to note is that  to the mystic the  mystic
state is a moment of intimate  association with a Unique
Other Self, transcending, encompassing, and momentarily
suppressing the private personality of the subject of
experience. Considering its content the mystic state  is
highly objective and cannot be regarded as a mere
retirement into the  mists of pure subjectivity. But you will
ask me how immediate experience of God, as an
Independent Other Self, is at all possible. The mere fact that
the mystic state is passive does not ﬁnally prove the
veritable ‘otherness’ of the  Self experienced. This question
arises in the mind because we assume, without criticism,
that our knowledge of the external  world through sense-
perception is the type of all knowledge. If this  were so, we
could never be sure of the reality of our own self. However,
in reply to it I suggest the analogy of our  daily social
experience. How do we know other minds in our social
intercourse? It is obvious that we know our own self and
Nature by inner reﬂection and sense-perception
respectively. We possess no sense for the experience of
other minds. The only ground of my knowledge of a
conscious being before me is the physical movements
similar to my own from which I infer  the presence of another
conscious being. Or we may say, after Professor Royce, that
our fellows are known to be real because they respond to
our signals and thus constantly supply the necessary
supplement to our own fragmentary  meanings. Response,
no doubt, is the test of the presence of a conscious self, and
the Qur’«n also takes the same view:

40
‘And your Lord saith, call Me and I respond to your call’
(40:60).
 ‘And when My servants ask thee concerning Me, then I am
nigh unto them and answer the cry of him  that crieth unto
Me’ (2:186).

It is clear that whether we apply the  physical criterion or the
non-physical and more adequate criterion of Royce, in either
case our knowledge of other minds remains something like
inferential only. Yet we feel that our experience of other
minds is immediate and never entertain  any doubt as to the
reality of our social experience. I do not, however, mean, at
the present stage of our inquiry, to build  on the implications
of our knowledge of other minds, an idealistic argument  in
favour of the reality of a Comprehensive Self. All that I mean
to suggest is that the immediacy  of our experience in the
mystic state is not without  a parallel. It has some sort of
resemblance to our normal experience and probably
belongs to the same category.

4. Since the quality of mystic experience is to be directly
experienced, it is obvious that it  cannot be communicated.38
Mystic states are more like feeling than thought. The
interpretation which the  mystic or the prophet puts  on the
content of his religious consciousness can be conveyed to
others in the form of propositions, but  the content itself
cannot be so transmitted. Thus in the following verses of the
Qur’«n it is the psychology and not the content  of the
experience that is given:

‘It is not for man that  God should speak to him, but by vision
or from behind a veil; or He sendeth a messenger to reveal
by His permission what He will: for He is Exalted, Wise’
(42:51).

‘By the star when it setteth,

41
 Your compatriot erreth not, nor is he led astray.
 Neither speaketh he from mere impulse.
 The Qur’«n is no other than the revelation revealed to him:
One strong in power taught it him,
 Endowed with wisdom with even balance stood he
 In the highest part of the horizon:
 Then came he nearer and approached,
 And was at the distance of two bows or even closer -
 And he revealed to the servant of God what he revealed:
 His heart falsiﬁed not what he saw:
 What! will ye then dispute with him as to what he saw?
 He had seen him also another time
 Near the Sidrah tree which marks the boundary:
 Near which is the garden of repose:
 When the Sidrah tree was covered with what covered it:
 His eye turned not aside, nor did it wander:
 For he saw the greatest of the signs of the Lord’ (53:1-18).

The incommunicability of mystic experience is due to the
fact that it  is essentially a matter of inarticulate  feeling,
untouched by discursive intellect. It must,  however, be
noted that mystic feeling,  like all feeling, has a cognitive
element also; and it is, I believe, because of this cognitive
element that it  lends itself to the form of  idea. In fact, it is
the nature of feeling to seek expression in thought.  It would
seem that the two - feeling and idea - are the  nontemporal
and temporal aspects of the same unit of inner experience.
But on this point I cannot do better  than quote Professor
Hocking who has made a remarkably keen study of feeling
in justiﬁcation of an intellectual  view of the content  of
religious consciousness:

‘What is that other-than-feeling in  which feeling may end? I
answer, consciousness of an object. Feeling is instability of
an entire conscious self: and that which will restore the
stability of this self lies not  within its own border but  beyond

42
it. Feeling is outward-pushing, as idea is outward-reporting:
and no feeling is so blind as to have no idea of its own
object. As a feeling possesses the mind, there also
possesses the mind, as an integral part of that feeling, some
idea of the kind of thing which will  bring it to rest.  A feeling
without a direction is as impossible as an activity without  a
direction: and a direction implies some objective. There are
vague states of consciousness in which we seem to be
wholly without direction;  but in such cases it is remarkable
that feeling is likewise in abeyance. For example, I may be
dazed by a blow, neither realizing what has happened nor
suﬀering any pain, and yet quite conscious that  something
has occurred: the experience waits an instant in the
vestibule of consciousness, not as feeling but purely as fact,
until idea has touched it and deﬁned a course of response.
At that same moment, it is felt  as painful. If we are right,
feeling is quite as much an objective consciousness as is
idea: it refers always to something beyond the present  self
and has no existence save in directing the self toward that
object in whose presence its own career must end!’39

Thus you will see that it is because of this essential nature
of feeling that while religion  starts with feeling, it  has never,
in its history, taken itself  as a matter of feeling alone and
has constantly striven after metaphysics. The mystic’s
condemnation of intellect as an organ of knowledge does
not really ﬁnd any justiﬁcation  in the history of religion.  But
Professor Hocking’s passage just quoted has a wider scope
than mere justiﬁcation of idea in  religion. The organic
relation of feeling and idea throws light  on the old
theological controversy about verbal revelation  which once
gave so much trouble to Muslim religious thinkers.40
Inarticulate feeling seeks to fulﬁl  its destiny in idea which, in
its turn, tends to develop out  of itself its own visible
garment. It is no mere metaphor to say that  idea and word
both simultaneously emerge out of the womb  of feeling,

43
though logical understanding cannot but take  them in a
temporal order and thus create its own diﬃculty  by
regarding them as mutually isolated. There is a sense in
which the word is also revealed.

5. The mystic’s intimate association with the  eternal which
gives him a sense of the unreality of serial time does not
mean a complete break with serial time. The mystic state  in
respect of its uniqueness remains in some way related to
common experience. This is clear from the fact that the
mystic state soon fades away, though it leaves a deep
sense of authority after it  has passed away. Both the mystic
and the prophet return to the  normal levels of experience,
but with this diﬀerence  that the return  of the prophet, as I
will show later, may be fraught with  inﬁnite meaning  for
mankind.

For the purposes of knowledge, then, the region of mystic
experience is as real as any other region of human
experience and cannot be ignored merely because it cannot
be traced back to sense-perception. Nor is it possible to
undo the spiritual value of the mystic  state by specifying the
organic conditions which appear to determine it.  Even if the
postulate of modern psychology as to the interrelation  of
body and mind is assumed to be true, it is illogical to
discredit the value of the mystic  state as a revelation of
truth. Psychologically speaking, all states, whether their
content is religious or non-religious, are organically
determined.41 The scientiﬁc form of mind is as much
organically determined as the religious. Our judgement as to
the creations of genius is not at all determined  or even
remotely aﬀected by what  our psychologists may say
regarding its organic conditions. A certain kind of
temperament may be a necessary condition for a certain
kind of receptivity; but  the antecedent condition  cannot be
regarded as the whole truth about the character  of what is

44
received. The truth is that the organic causation of  our
mental states has nothing to do with  the criteria by which
we judge them to be superior or inferior  in point of value.
‘Among the visions and messages’, says Professor William
James,

‘some have always been too patently silly, among the
trances and convulsive seizures some have been too
fruitless for conduct and character, to pass themselves oﬀ
as signiﬁcant, still less as divine. In the history of Christian
mysticism the problem how to discriminate  between such
messages and experiences as were really divine miracles,
and such others as the demon in his malice was able to
counterfeit, thus making the  religious person twofold more
the child of hell he was before, has always been a diﬃcult
one to solve, needing all the sagacity and experience of the
best directors of conscience. In the end it had come to our
empiricist criterion:  By their fruits ye shall know them, not
by their roots’.42
The problem of Christian mysticism alluded to by Professor
James has been in fact the problem of all mysticism. The
demon in his malice does counterfeit experiences which
creep into the circuit of the  mystic state. As we read in the
Qur’«n:

‘We have not sent any Apostle or Prophet43 before thee
among whose desires Satan injected not some wrong desire,
but God shall bring to nought that which Satan had
suggested. Thus shall God aﬃrm His revelations, for God is
Knowing and Wise’ (22:52).

And it is in the elimination of the  satanic from the Divine
that the followers of Freud have done inestimable service to
religion; though I cannot help saying that  the main theory of
this newer psychology does not appear to me to be
supported by any adequate evidence. If our vagrant

45
impulses assert themselves in our dreams, or at other times
we are not strictly ourselves, it  does not follow that they
remain imprisoned in a kind of lumber room  behind the
normal self. The occasional invasion of these suppressed
impulses on the region of our normal self tends more to
show the temporary disruption  of our habitual system of
responses rather than their perpetual presence in some
dark corner of the mind. However, the theory  is brieﬂy this.
During the process of our adjustment to our environment  we
are exposed to all sorts of stimuli. Our habitual responses to
these stimuli gradually fall  into a relatively ﬁxed  system,
constantly growing in complexity  by absorbing some and
rejecting other impulses which do not ﬁt  in with our
permanent system of responses. The rejected impulses
recede into what is called the ‘unconscious region’ of the
mind, and there wait for  a suitable opportunity to  assert
themselves and take their revenge on the focal self. They
may disturb our plans of action, distort  our thought, build
our dreams and phantasies, or carry us back to forms of
primitive behaviour  which the evolutionary process has left
far behind. Religion, it is said, is a pure ﬁction created by
these repudiated impulses of mankind with a view  to ﬁnd a
kind of fairyland for free  unobstructed movement. Religious
beliefs and dogmas, according to the theory, are no more
than merely primitive  theories of Nature, whereby mankind
has tried to redeem Reality from its elemental  ugliness and
to show it oﬀ as something nearer to the  heart’s desire than
the facts of life would warrant.  That there are religions and
forms of art, which provide a kind of cowardly  escape from
the facts of life, I do not deny. All that I contend  is that this
is not true of all religions. No doubt, religious beliefs  and
dogmas have a metaphysical signiﬁcance; but it is obvious
that they are not  interpretations of those data  of experience
which are the subject of the science of Nature. Religion is
not physics or chemistry seeking an explanation of Nature in
terms of causation; it really  aims at interpreting a totally

46
diﬀerent region of human experience - religious experience -
the data of which cannot be reduced to the data  of any
other science. In fact, it must be said in justice to  religion
that it insisted on the  necessity of concrete experience in
religious life long before science learnt to do so.44 The
conﬂict between the two is due not to  the fact that  the one
is, and the other is not, based on concrete experience. Both
seek concrete experience as a point of departure. Their
conﬂict is due to the misapprehension that  both interpret
the same data of experience. We forget that religion aims at
reaching the real signiﬁcance of a special variety of human
experience.

Nor is it possible to explain away the content of religious
consciousness by attributing the whole thing to  the working
of the sex-impulse. The two forms of consciousness - sexual
and religious - are often hostile or, at any rate, completely
diﬀerent to each other in point  of their character, their  aim,
and the kind of conduct they generate. The truth  is that in a
state of religious passion we know a factual reality in some
sense outside the narrow circuit of our personality. To the
psychologist religious passion necessarily appears as the
work of the subconscious because of the intensity with
which it shakes up the depths of our being. In all knowledge
there is an element of passion, and the object of knowledge
gains or loses in objectivity with the  rise and fall in the
intensity of passion. That is most real to us which stirs up
the entire fabric of our personality. As Professor Hocking
pointedly puts it:

‘If ever upon the stupid day-length  time-span of any self or
saint either, some vision breaks to roll his life and ours into
new channels, it can only be because that vision admits into
his soul some trooping invasion of the concrete fullness of
eternity. Such vision doubtless means subconscious
readiness and subconscious resonance too, - but the

47
expansion of the unused aircells does not argue that we
have ceased to breathe the outer air: - the very  opposite!’45

A purely psychological method, therefore, cannot explain
religious passion as a form of knowledge. It is bound to fail
in the case of our newer psychologists as it did fail in the
case of Locke and Hume.

The foregoing discussion, however, is sure to raise an
important question in your  mind. Religious experience, I
have tried to maintain, is essentially  a state of feeling with a
cognitive aspect, the content of which cannot  be
communicated to others, except in the  form of a judgement.
Now when a judgement which claims to be the
interpretation of a certain  region of human experience, not
accessible to me, is placed before me for my assent, I am
entitled to ask, what is the guarantee  of its truth? Are we in
possession of a test which would reveal its validity? If
personal experience had been the only ground for
acceptance of a judgement of this kind, religion would have
been the possession of a few individuals only. Happily we
are in possession of tests which do not diﬀer from those
applicable to other forms of knowledge. These I call the
intellectual test and the  pragmatic test. By the intellectual
test I mean critical interpretation,  without  any
presuppositions of human experience, generally with a view
to discover whether our interpretation  leads us ultimately to
a reality of the same character as is revealed by religious
experience. The pragmatic test judges it by its fruits.  The
former is applied by the philosopher, the latter  by the
prophet. In the lecture that  follows, I will apply the
intellectual test.

Lecture  I Notes:

48
1. Reference here is to the following verse from the mystical
allegorical work: ManÇiq al-ñair (p. 243, v. 5), generally
considered the magnum opus, of one of the greatest suﬁ
poets and thinkers Farâd al-Dân ‘AÇÇ«r’ (d.c. 
618/1220):

2. A. N. Whitehead, Religion in the Making, p. 5.
 3. Ibid., p. 73.
 4. Cf. H. L. Bergson, Creative Evolution, pp. 187-88; on this
intuition-intellect  relation see also Allama Iqbal’s essay:
Bedil in the light of Bergson, ed. Dr Tehsin Firaqi, pp. 22-23.

5. Allahumm«arin« haq«’iq al-ashy«kam«hâya, a tradition,
in one form or other, to be found in  well-known Suﬁstic
works, for example, ‘Alâb. ‘Uthm«n al-Hujwayrâ, Kashf al-
MaÁjëb, p. 166; Mawl«n« Jal«l al-Dân Rëmâ, Mathnawâ-i
Ma’nawâ, ii, 466-67; iv, 3567-68; v, 1765; MaÁmëd
Shabistarâ (d. 720/1320), Gulshan-i R«z, verse 200, and
‘Abd al-RaÁm«n J«mâ (d. 898/1492), Law«’ih, p. 3.

6. Qur’«n, 16:68-69.
 7. Ibid., 2:164; 24:43-44; 30:48; 35:9; 45:5.
 8. Ibid., 15:16; 25:6; 37:6; 41:12; 50:6; 67:5; 85:1. 9. Ibid.,
21:33; 36:40.
 10. Cf. F. M. Cornford: Plato’s Theory of Knowledge, pp.
29;109; also Bertrand Russell: History of Western
Philosophy, chapter: ‘Knowledge and Perception in Plato’.
 11. Qur’«n, 16:78; 23:78; 32:9; 67:23.

12. Ibid., 17:36. References here, as also at other places in
the Lectures, to a dozen Quranic verses in two sentences
bespeak of what is uppermost in Allama Iqbal’s mind, i.e.
Quranic empiricism which by its very nature  gives rise to a
Weltanschauung of the highest religious order. He tells us,
for example, that the  general empirical attitude  of the
Qur’a`n engenders a feeling of reverence for the actual  and

49
that one way of entering into  relation with Reality is through
reﬂective observation and control  of its perceptually
revealed symbols (cf. below, pp. 11-12, italics mine; also
Lecture V, p. 102, not 9).

13. For anti-classicism of the Qur’«n cf. Mazheruddân
Âiddiqâ, Concept of Muslim Culture in Iqbal, pp. 13-25; also
Lecture V, note 21.

14. See R. A. Tsanoﬀ, The Problem of Immortality (a work
listed at S. No. 37 in the Descriptive Catalogue of Allama
Iqbal’s Personal Library), pp. 75-77; cf. also B. H. Zedler,
‘Averroes and Immortality’, New Scholasticism (1954), pp.
436-53. It is to be noted that  Tsanoﬀ marshals the views of
S. Munk (Mé langes de philosophie, pp. 454 ﬀ.), E. Renan
(Averroes et I’averroisme, pp. 152, 158), A Stockl
(Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, 11, 117, 119),
de Boer (Geschichte der Philosophie, p. 173) and M. Horten
(Die Hauptlehren des Averroes, pp. 244 ﬀ.) as against those
of Carra de Vaux as presented by him in his work Avicenne,
pp. 233 ﬀ., as well as in the article:  ‘Averroes’ in
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, II, 264-65, and
clinches the matter thus:  ‘certainly - and this is more
signiﬁcant for our purpose - it was as a denier of personal
immortality  that scholasticism received and criticised
Averroes’ (p. 77, II, 16-19). For a recent and more balanced
view of ‘Ibn Rushd’s doctrine of immortality,  cf. Roger
Arnaldez and A. Z. Iskander, ‘Ibn Rushd’, Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, XII, 7a-7b. It is to be noted, however,
that M. E. Marmura in his article on ‘Soul: Islamic Concepts’
in The Encyclopedia of Religion, XIII, 465 clearly avers that
Ibn Rushd’s commentaries on Aristotle leave no room for a
doctrine of individual immortality.

15. Cf. Tsanoﬀ, op. cit., pp. 77-84, and M. Yënus Farangi
Mahallâ, Ibn Rushd (Urdu; partly based on Renan’s Averroes

50
et l’averroisme), pp. 347-59.
 16. See Lecture IV, pp. 93-98, and Lecture VII, pp. 156-57.

17. Reference is to the expression lawÁ-in mahfëzin used in
the Quranic verse 85:22. For the interpretation this  unique
expression of the Qur’«n see M. Asad, The Message of the
Qur’«n, p. 943, note; and Fazlur Rahman, Major Themes of
the Qur’a`n, p. 98 - the  latter seems to come quite close to
Allama Iqbal’s generally very keen perception of the
meanings of the Qur’«n.

18. This comes quite close to the contemporary French
philosopher Louis Rougier’s statement in his Philosophy and
the New Physics p. 146, II, 17-21. This work, listed at S. No.
15 in the Descriptive Catalogue of Allama Iqbal’s Personal
Library, is cited in Lecture III, p. 59.

19. Reference here is to Tevfâk Fikret, pseudonym of
Mehmed Tevﬁk, also known as Tevﬁk Nazmâ, and not to
Tawﬁk Fitrat as it got printed in the previous editions of the
present work. Fikret, widely considered the founder of the
modern school of Turkish poetry and remembered among
other works for his collection of poems: Rub«bi Shikeste
(‘The Broken Lute’), died in Istanbul on 18 August 1915 at
the age of forty-eight.  For an account of Fikret’s literary
career and his anti-religious views, cf. Niyazi Berkes, The
Development of Secularism in Turkey, pp. 300-02 and 338-
39; also Haydar Ali Dirioz’s brief paper in Turkish on Fikret’s
birth-centenary translated  by Dr M. H. Notqi in Journal of the
Regional Cultural Institute, 1/4 (Autumn 1968), 12-15.

It is for Turkish-Persian scholars to determine the extent to
which Fikret made use of the great poet-thinker Bedil (d.
1133/1721) for ‘the  anti-religious and especially anti-Islamic
propaganda in Central Asia’. Among very many works on
both Bedil and Fikret that have appeared since Allama’s

51
days and are likely to receive the scholars’ attention,
mention must be made of Allama’s own short perceptive
study: ‘Bedil in the Light of Bergson’, and unpublished essay
in Allama’s hand (20 folios) preserved in the Allama Iqbal
Museum (Lahore); cf. Dr Ahmad Nabi Khan, Relics of Allama
Iqbal (Catalogue) , 1, 25, with photographic reproduction of
the ﬁrst sheet.

20. Cf. John Oxenford (tr.), Conversations of Goethe with
Eckermann and Sorret , p. 41.

21. The Qur’«n condemns monkery; see 57:27; 2:201; and
28:77. Cf. also Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal,
ed. A. L. Sherwani, p. 7, for Allama Iqbal’s observations on
the respective attitudes  of Christianity and Islam towards
the problems of life, leading to his keenly profound
pronouncement: ‘The religious ideal of Islam, therefore, is
organically related to the  social order which it has created’.

22. There are many verses of the Qur’«n wherein it has
been maintained that the  universe has not been created in
sport (l«’ibân) or in vain (b«Çil-an) but for  a serious end or
with truth  (bi’l-Áhaqq). These are respectively: (a) 
21:16; 44:38; (b) 3:191; 38:27;  (c) 6:73; 10:5; 14:19; 15:85;
16:3; 29:44; 30:8; 39:5; 44:39;  45:22; 46:3; and 
64:3.

23. See also the Quranic verse 51:47 wherein the phrase
inna la-mu`si’u`n  has been interpreted to clearly
foreshadow the modern notion of the ‘expanding  universe’
(cf. M. Asad, The Message of the Qur’a`n, p. 805, note 31).

24. Reference here is in particular to the Prophetic tradition
worded as: l«tasubbëal-dahra fa inn All«h huwa’ldahru,
(AÁmad Àanbal, Musnad, V, 299 and 311). Cf. also Bukh«râ,
Tafsâr: 45; TauÁâd: 35; Adab`: 101; and Muslim, Alf«z 2-4;

52
for other variants of the  Áadâth SaÁâfa Hamm«m-Bin-
Munabbih (ed. Dr. M. Hamidullah) Áadâth 117, gives one of
its earliest recorded texts.

In an exceedingly important section captioned Al-Waqtu
Saif-un (Time is Sword) of his celebrated Asr«r-iKhudâ,
Allama Iqbal has referred to the above hadit`h  thus:
 Life is of Time and Time is of Life;
 Do not abuse Time!’ was the command of the Prophet.
(trans. Nicholson)
 25. Reference is to the Quranic verse 70:19 which says:
‘Man has been created restless (halë’an).’
 26. This is very close to the language of the Qur’«n which
speaks of the hardening of the hearts, so that they  were like
rocks: see 2:74; 5:13; 6:43; 39:22; and 57:16.

This shows that Allama Iqbal, through his keenly perceptive
study of the Qur’«n, had psychically assimilated both  its
meanings and its diction so much so that many of his
visions, very largely found in his poetical works, may  be said
to be born of this rare assimilation; cf. Dr Ghul«m Mustaf«
Kh«n’s voluminous Iqb«l aur Qur’«n (in Urdu).

27. Qur’«n, 41:35; also 51:20-21.
 28. Reference here is to the Mathnawâ, ii, 52:
 The bodily sense is eating the food of darkness
 The spiritual sense is feeding from a sun (trans. Nicholson).
 29. Qur’«n, 53:11-12.
 30. Ibid., 22:46.

31. Cf. Bukh«râ, Jan«’iz, 79; Shah«dah 3; Jih«d: 160, 178;
and Muslim, Fitan: 95-96. D. J. Halperin’s article: ‘The Ibn
Âayy«d Traditions and the Legend of al-Dajj«l’, Journal of the
American Oriental Society, XCII/ii (1976), 213-25, gives an
atomistic analytic account of  the ah«dâth listed by him.
32. In Arabic: lau tarakathu bayyana, an invariable part  of

53
the text of a number  of ah«dâth about Ibn Âayy«d; cf. D. B.
Macdonald, The Religious Attitude and Life in Islam, pp. 35
ﬀ.; this book, which represents Macdonald’s reputed Haskell
Lectures on Comparative Religion at Chicago University in
1906, seems to have received Allama’s close attention in
the present discussion.

33. Ibid., p. 36.
 34. Cf. Lecture V, pp. 100 ﬀ.

35. The term ‘subliminal self’ was coined by F. W. H. Myers
in the 1890’s which soon became popular in ‘religious
psychology’ to designate what was believed to be the  larger
portion of the self lying  beyond the level of consciousness,
yet constantly inﬂuencing  thought and behaviour as in
parapsychic phenomena. With William James the concept of
subliminal self came to stand for the  area of human
experience in which contact with the  Divine Life may occur
(cf. The Varieties of Religious Experience, pp. 511-15).

36. Macdonald, op. cit., p. 42.
 37. Cf. MuÁyuddân Ibn al-‘Arabâ’s observation that ‘God is a
precept, the world is a concept’, referred  to in Lecture VII, p.
144, note 4.
 38. Ibid., p. 145, where it is observed: ‘Indeed the
incommunicability of religious  experience gives us a clue to
the ultimate  nature of the human ego’.

39. W. E. Hocking, The Meaning of God in Human
Experience, p. 66. It is important to note  here that according
to Richard C. Gilman this concept of the inextricable union
of idea and feeling is the source of strong strain of
mysticism is Hocking’s philosophy, but it is a mysticism
which does not abandon the role of intellect  in clarifying and
correcting intuition;  cf. his article: ‘Hocking, William Ernest’,
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, IV, 47 (italics mine).

54
40. Reference here perhaps is to the hot and long-drawn
controversy between the Mu‘tazilites  (early Muslim
rationalists) and the Ash’arties (the  orthodox scholastics) on
the issue of Khalq al-Qur’«n, i.e. the createdness or the
eternity of the  Qur’«n; for which see Lecture VI, note 9. The
context of the passage, however, strongly suggests that
Allama Iqbal means to refer here to the common orthodox
belief that the  text of the Qur’«n is verbally  revealed, i.e.
the ‘word’ is as much revealed as the ‘meaning’.  This has
perhaps never been controverted and rarely if ever
discussed in the history of Muslim theology - one notable
instance of its discussion is that by Sh«h Walâ All«h in
Sata’«t and Fuyëz al-Àaramain. Nevertheless, it is signiﬁcant
to note that there  is some analogical empirical evidence in
Allama’s personal life in support of the orthodox  belief in
verbal revelation. Once asked by Professor Lucas, Principal
of a local college, in a private discourse, whether, despite
his vast learning, he too subscribed to belief in verbal
revelation, Allama immediately  replied that it  was not a
matter of belief  with him but a veritable  personal
experience for it was thus, he added, he composed his
poems under the spells of poetic inspiration - surely,
Prophetic revelations are far more exalted. Cf. ‘Abdul Majâd
S«lik, Dhikr-i Iqb«l, pp. 244-45 and Faqir Sayyid WaÁâd-ud-
Dân, Rëzg«r-i Faqâr, pp. 38-39. After Allama’s epoch-making
mathnawi: Asr«r-i Khudâ was published in 1915 and it had
given rise to some bitter  controversy because of his critique
of ‘ajami tasawwuf, and of the great  À«ﬁz, he in a letter
dated 14 April 1916 addressed to Mah«r«ja Kishen Parsh«d
conﬁded strictly in a personal way: ‘I did  not compose the
mathnawâ myself; I was made to (guided to), to  do so’; cf.
M. ‘Abdull«h Quraishâ’ Naw«dir-i Iqb«l (Ghair MaÇbu’ah
Khutët)’, Sahâfah, Lahore, ‘Iqb«l Nambar’ (October 1973),
Letter No. 41, p. 168.

41. Cf. William James, op. cit., p. 15.

55
 42. Ibid., p. 21.

43. The designation ‘apostle’ ( rasël) is applied to bearers of
divine revelations which embody a new doctrinal  system or
dispensation; a ‘prophet’ (nabâ), on the  other hand, is said
to be one whom God has entrusted with enunciation of
ethical principles on the basis of an already existing
dispensation, or of principles common to all dispensations.
Hence, every apostle is a prophet as well, but every prophet
is not an apostle.

44. Cf. Lecture VII, pp. 143-144, where this point is
reiterated. 45. E. W. Hocking, op. cit., pp.106-107.
 The Philosophical   Test of  the  Revelations   of  Religious
Experience
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal

Scholastic philosophy has put forward three arguments for
the existence of God. These arguments, known as the
Cosmological, the Teleological, and the Ontological, embody
a real movement of thought  in its quest after the  Absolute.
But regarded as logical proofs, I am afraid, they are open to
serious criticism and further betray  a rather superﬁcial
interpretation  of experience.

The cosmological argument views the world as a ﬁnite
eﬀect, and passing through a series of dependent
sequences, related as causes and eﬀects, stops at an
uncaused ﬁrst cause, because of the unthinkability of an
inﬁnite regress. It is, however, obvious that  a ﬁnite eﬀect
can give only a ﬁnite cause, or at most an inﬁnite  series of
such causes. To ﬁnish the series at a certain point, and to
elevate one member of the series to the dignity  of an
uncaused ﬁrst cause, is to set at naught the very  law of
causation on which the whole argument proceeds. Further,
the ﬁrst cause reached by the argument  necessarily

56
excludes its eﬀect. And this means that the eﬀect,
constituting a limit  to its own cause, reduces it to something
ﬁnite. Again, the cause reached by the argument cannot be
regarded as a necessary being for the obvious reason that
in the relation of cause and eﬀect the two  terms of the
relation are equally necessary to each other. Nor is the
necessity of existence identical with the conceptual
necessity of causation which is the utmost that  this
argument can prove. The argument really tries to reach the
inﬁnite by merely negating  the ﬁnite. But the  inﬁnite
reached by contradicting the ﬁnite  is a false inﬁnite, which
neither explains itself nor the ﬁnite  which is thus made to
stand in opposition to the inﬁnite.  The true inﬁnite does not
exclude the ﬁnite; it  embraces the ﬁnite without  eﬀacing its
ﬁnitude, and explains and justiﬁes its being. Logically
speaking, then, the movement from the  ﬁnite to the  inﬁnite
as embodied in the cosmological argument is quite
illegitimate; and the  argument fails in toto. The teleological
argument is no better. It scrutinizes the eﬀect  with a view to
discover the character of its cause. From the traces of
foresight, purpose, and adaptation in nature, it  infers the
existence of a self-conscious being of inﬁnite intelligence
and power. At best, it gives us a skilful external contriver
working on a pre-existing dead and intractable material  the
elements of which are, by their own nature, incapable of
orderly structures and combinations. The argument gives us
a contriver only and not a creator; and even if  we suppose
him to be also the creator of his material,  it does no credit
to his wisdom to create his own diﬃculties by  ﬁrst creating
intractable material,  and then overcoming its resistance by
the application of methods alien to its  original nature. The
designer regarded as external to his material must always
remain limited by his material,  and hence a ﬁnite designer
whose limited resources compel him to overcome his
diﬃculties after the  fashion of a human mechanician. The
truth is that  the analogy on which the argument proceeds is

57
of no value at all. There is really no analogy between the
work of the human artiﬁcer  and the phenomena of Nature.
The human artiﬁcer cannot work out his plan except by
selecting and isolating his materials from their  natural
relations and situations. Nature, however, constitutes a
system of wholly interdependent members;  her processes
present no analogy to the architect’s work  which, depending
on a progressive isolation and integration of its material,
can oﬀer no resemblance to the evolution of organic wholes
in Nature. The ontological argument which has been
presented in various forms by various thinkers has always
appealed most to the speculative mind. The Cartesian form
of the argument runs thus:

‘To say that an attribute is contained in the nature  or in the
concept of a thing is the same as to say that the  attribute is
true of this thing and that  it may be aﬃrmed  to be in it. But
necessary existence is contained in the nature or the
concept of God. Hence it may be with truth aﬃrmed  that
necessary existence is in God, or that God exists.’1

Descartes supplements this argument by another. We have
the idea of a perfect being in our mind.  What is the source
of the idea? It cannot come from Nature, for Nature exhibits
nothing but change. It cannot create the  idea of a perfect
being. Therefore corresponding to the idea in our mind there
must be an objective counterpart which is the  cause of the
idea of a perfect being in our mind. This argument is
somewhat of the nature of the cosmological argument  which
I have already criticized. But whatever may be the form  of
the argument, it is clear that  the conception of existence is
no proof of objective existence. As in Kant’s criticism of this
argument the notion of three  hundred dollars in my mind
cannot prove that I have them in my  pocket.2 All that the
argument proves is that the idea of a perfect  being includes
the idea of his existence. Between the idea of a perfect

58
being in my mind and the objective  reality of that  being
there is a gulf which cannot be bridged over by a
transcendental act of thought. The argument,  as stated, is
in fact a petitio principii:3 for  it takes for granted the  very
point in question, i.e. the transition  from the logical to  the
real. I hope I have made it clear to you that the  ontological
and the teleological arguments, as ordinarily stated,  carry
us nowhere. And the reason of their failure is that they look
upon ‘thought’ as an agency working on things from
without. This view of thought gives us a mere mechanician
in the one case, and creates an unbridgeable gulf between
the ideal and the real in the other. It  is, however, possible to
take thought not as a principle which organizes and
integrates its material  from the outside, but as a potency
which is formative of the very  being of its material. Thus
regarded thought or idea is not alien to the  original nature
of things; it is their  ultimate ground and constitutes  the very
essence of their being, infusing itself in them from  the very
beginning of their career and inspiring their  onward march
to a self-determined end. But our present situation
necessitates the dualism of thought and being. Every act of
human knowledge bifurcates what might on proper  inquiry
turn out to be a unity  into a self that knows and a
confronting ‘other’  that is known. That is why we are forced
to regard the object that  confronts the self as something
existing in its own right, external  to and independent of the
self whose act of knowledge makes no diﬀerence to the
object known. The true signiﬁcance of the ontological and
the teleological arguments will appear only if  we are able to
show that the human situation is not  ﬁnal and that thought
and being are ultimately one. This is possible only if we
carefully examine and interpret experience, following  the
clue furnished by the Qur’«n which regards experience
within and without as symbolic of a reality  described by it,4

59
as ‘the First and the Last, the Visible and the Invisible’.5 This
I propose to do in the present lecture.

Now experience, as unfolding itself in time, presents three
main levels - the level of matter,  the level of life, and the
level of mind and consciousness - the subject-matter of
physics, biology, and psychology, respectively. Let us ﬁrst
turn our attention  to matter. In order exactly to  appreciate
the position of modern physics it is necessary to understand
clearly what we mean by matter. Physics, as an empirical
science, deals with the facts of experience, i.e. sense-
experience. The physicist begins and ends with sensible
phenomena, without which it is impossible for him  to verify
his theories. He may postulate imperceptible entities,  such
as atoms; but he does so because he cannot otherwise
explain his sense-experience. Thus physics studies the
material world, that  is to say, the world revealed by the
senses. The mental processes involved in this study, and
similarly religious and aesthetic experience, though part  of
the total range of experience, are excluded from the  scope
of physics for the obvious reason that physics is restricted to
the study of the material  world, by which we mean the
world of things we perceive. But when I ask you what are
the things you perceive in the material  world, you will, of
course, mention the familiar things  around you, e.g. earth,
sky, mountains, chairs, tables, etc. When I further ask you
what exactly you perceive of these things, you will  answer -
their qualities. It is clear that  in answering such a question
we are really putting an interpretation  on the evidence of
our senses. The interpretation consists in making a
distinction between the thing  and its qualities. This really
amounts to a theory of matter,  i.e. of the nature of sense-
data, their relation to  the perceiving mind and their  ultimate
causes. The substance of this theory is as follows:

60
‘The sense objects (colours, sounds, etc.) are states of the
perceiver’s mind, and as such excluded from nature
regarded as something objective. For this reason they
cannot be in any proper sense qualities of physical things.
When I say "The sky is blue," it can only mean that the sky
produces a blue sensation in my mind, and not that the
colour blue is a quality found in the sky. As mental states
they are impressions, that is to say, they are eﬀects
produced in us. The cause of these eﬀects is matter, or
material things acting through  our sense organs, nerves,
and brain on our mind. This physical cause acts by contact
or impact; hence it must possess the qualities of shape,
size, solidity and resistance.’6

It was the philosopher Berkeley who ﬁrst undertook to refute
the theory of matter  as the unknown cause of our
sensations.7 In our own times Professor Whitehead - an
eminent mathematician and scientist  - has conclusively
shown that the traditional  theory of materialism  is wholly
untenable. It is obvious that, on the theory,  colours, sounds,
etc., are subjective states only, and form no part  of Nature.
What enters the eye and the ear is not colour or sound, but
invisible ether waves and inaudible air waves. Nature is not
what we know her to be; our perceptions are illusions and
cannot be regarded as genuine disclosures of Nature, which,
according to the theory, is bifurcated  into mental
impressions, on the one hand, and the unveriﬁable,
imperceptible entities producing these impressions, on the
other. If physics constitutes a really coherent and genuine
knowledge of perceptively known objects, the traditional
theory of matter must  be rejected for the obvious reason
that it reduces the evidence of our senses, on which alone
the physicist, as observer and experimenter, must rely,  to
the mere impressions of the observer’s mind. Between
Nature and the observer of Nature, the theory creates a gulf
which he is compelled to bridge over by resorting to  the

61
doubtful hypothesis of an imperceptible  something,
occupying an absolute space like a thing in a receptacle and
causing our sensation by some kind of impact. In the words
of Professor Whitehead, the theory reduces one-half of
Nature to a ‘dream’ and the other  half to a ‘conjecture’.8
Thus physics, ﬁnding it necessary to criticize its own
foundations, has eventually found reason to break its own
idol, and the empirical attitude  which appeared to
necessitate scientiﬁc materialism has ﬁnally  ended in a
revolt against matter. Since objects, then, are not subjective
states caused by something imperceptible called matter,
they are genuine phenomena which constitute the very
substance of Nature and which we know as they are in
Nature. But the concept of matter has received the  greatest
blow from the hand of Einstein - another eminent physicist,
whose discoveries have laid the foundation of a farreaching
revolution in the entire  domain of human thought. ‘The
theory of Relativity by merging  time into spacetime’, says
Mr. Russell,

‘has damaged the traditional notion  of substance more than
all the arguments of the philosophers. Matter, for  common
sense, is something which persists in time and moves in
space. But for modern relativity-physics this view is no
longer tenable. A piece of matter has become not a
persistent thing with  varying states, but a system of inter-
related events. The old solidity is gone, and with it the
characteristics that to the  materialist made matter  seem
more real than ﬂeeting thoughts.’

According to Professor Whitehead, therefore, Nature is not a
static fact situated in  an adynamic void, but a structure of
events possessing the character of a continuous creative
ﬂow which thought cuts up into  isolated immobilities out of
whose mutual relations arise the concepts of space and
time. Thus we see how modern science utters its agreement

62
with Berkeley’s criticism which it  once regarded as an attack
on its very foundation. The scientiﬁc view of Nature as pure
materiality is associated with the  Newtonian view of space
as an absolute void in which things are situated. This
attitude of science has, no doubt, ensured its speedy
progress; but the bifurcation of a total  experience into two
opposite domains of mind and matter has today forced it,  in
view of its own domestic diﬃculties,  to consider the
problems which, in the beginning of its career, it  completely
ignored. The criticism of the foundations of the
mathematical sciences has fully disclosed that the
hypothesis of a pure materiality, an enduring  stuﬀ situated
in an absolute space, is unworkable. Is space an
independent void in which things are situated  and which
would remain intact if all things  were withdrawn? The
ancient Greek philosopher Zeno approached the problem of
space through the question of movement in space. His
arguments for the unreality  of movement are well known to
the students of philosophy, and ever since his days the
problem has persisted in the history of thought  and received
the keenest attention from  successive generations of
thinkers. Two of these arguments may be noted here.9 Zeno,
who took space to be inﬁnitely divisible,  argued that
movement in space is impossible. Before the moving body
can reach the point of its destination it  must pass through
half the space intervening between the point  of start and
the point of destination;  and before it can pass through that
half it must travel  through the half of the  half, and so on to
inﬁnity. We cannot move from one point of space to another
without passing through an inﬁnite  number of points in the
intervening space. But it is impossible to pass through an
inﬁnity of points in  a ﬁnite time. He further  argued that the
ﬂying arrow does not move, because at any time during the
course of its ﬂight it is at  rest in some point of space. Thus
Zeno held that movement is only a deceptive appearance

63
and that Reality is one and immutable. The unreality of
movement means the unreality of an independent  space.
Muslim thinkers of the school of al-Ash‘arâdid not believe in
the inﬁnite divisibility  of space and time. With them  space,
time, and motion are made up of points and instants  which
cannot be further subdivided. Thus they proved the
possibility of movement on the assumption that
inﬁnitesimals do exist; for if  there is a limit to the  divisibility
of space and time, movement from one point of  space to
another point is possible in a ﬁnite time.10 Ibn Àazm,
however, rejected the Ash‘arite notion of inﬁnitesimals,11
and modern mathematics has conﬁrmed his view. The
Ash‘arite argument, therefore, cannot logically  resolve the
paradox of Zeno. Of modern thinkers the French philosopher
Bergson and the British mathematician Bertrand Russell
have tried to refute Zeno’s arguments  from their respective
standpoints. To Bergson movement, as true change, is the
fundamental Reality. The paradox of Zeno is due to a wrong
apprehension of space and time which are regarded by
Bergson only as intellectual views of movement. It is not
possible to develop here the argument of Bergson without a
fuller treatment  of the metaphysical concept of life on which
the whole argument is based.12 Bertrand Russell’s argument
proceeds on Cantor’s theory of mathematical continuity13
which he looks upon as one of the most important
discoveries of modern mathematics.14 Zeno’s argument is
obviously based on the assumption that space and time
consist of inﬁnite number of points  and instants. On this
assumption it is easy to argue that since between two
points the moving body will be out  of place, motion is
impossible, for there is no place for it to take  place. Cantor’s
discovery shows that space and time are continuous.
Between any two points in space there is an inﬁnite number
of points, and in an inﬁnite series no two points are next  to
each other. The inﬁnite divisibility of space and time  means

64
the compactness of the points in the series; it does not
mean that points are mutually  isolated in the sense of
having a gap between one another. Russell’s answer to
Zeno, then, is as follows:

‘Zeno asks how can you go from one position at one
moment to the next  position at the next moment  without in
the transition being at no position  at no moment? The
answer is that there is no next position to any  position, no
next moment to any moment  because between any two
there is always another. If there were inﬁnitesimals
movement would be impossible, but there are none. Zeno
therefore is right in saying that  the arrow is at rest at every
moment of its ﬂight,  wrong in inferring that  therefore it does
not move, for there is a one-one correspondence in a
movement between the inﬁnite  series of positions and the
inﬁnite series of instants. According to this doctrine,  then it
is possible to aﬃrm the reality  of space, time, and
movement, and yet avoid the paradox in Zeno’s
arguments.’15

Thus Bertrand Russell proves the reality of movement on
the basis of Cantor’s theory of continuity. The reality of
movement means the independent reality  of space and the
objectivity of Nature. But the  identity of continuity  and the
inﬁnite divisibility  of space is no solution of the diﬃculty.
Assuming that there is a one-one correspondence between
the inﬁnite multiplicity  of instants  in a ﬁnite interval  of time
and an inﬁnite multiplicity  of points in a ﬁnite  portion of
space, the diﬃculty arising from  the divisibility  remains the
same. The mathematical conception of continuity as inﬁnite
series applies not to movement regarded as an act, but
rather to the picture  of movement as viewed from the
outside. The act of movement, i.e. movement as lived and
not as thought, does not admit of any divisibility.  The ﬂight
of the arrow observed as a passage in space is divisible, but

65
its ﬂight regarded as an act, apart from  its realization in
space, is one and incapable of partition into a multiplicity.  In
partition lies its destruction.

With Einstein space is real, but relative to the observer. He
rejects the Newtonian concept of an absolute space. The
object observed is variable; it is relative  to the observer; its
mass, shape, and size change as the observer’s position and
speed change. Movement and rest, too, are relative to the
observer. There is, therefore, no such thing as a self-
subsistent materiality  of classical physics. It is, however,
necessary here to guard against a misunderstanding. The
use of the word ‘observer’ in this connexion has misled
Wildon Carr into the view that the theory  of Relativity
inevitably leads to Monadistic Idealism. It is true that
according to the theory the shapes, sizes, and durations of
phenomena are not absolute. But as Professor Nunn points
out, the space-time frame does not depend on the
observer’s mind; it depends on the point of  the material
universe to which his body is attached. In fact, the
‘observer’ can be easily replaced by a recording
apparatus.16 Personally, I believe that the ultimate
character of Reality is spiritual: but in order  to avoid a
widespread misunderstanding it is necessary to point out
that Einstein’s theory, which, as a scientiﬁc theory,  deals
only with the structure  of things, throws no light on the
ultimate nature of things  which possess that structure. The
philosophical value of the theory is twofold. First, it  destroys,
not the objectivity  of Nature, but the view of substance as
simple location in space - a view which led to materialism in
Classical Physics. ‘Substance’ for modern Relativity-Physics
is not a persistent thing with  variable states, but a system of
interrelated events. In Whitehead’s presentation of  the
theory the notion of ‘matter’  is entirely  replaced by the
notion of ‘organism’. Secondly, the theory makes space
dependent on matter. The universe, according to Einstein, is

66
not a kind of island in an inﬁnite  space; it is ﬁnite but
boundless; beyond it there is no empty space. In the
absence of matter the universe would shrink to a point.
Looking, however, at the theory from the standpoint  that I
have taken in these lectures, Einstein’s Relativity presents
one great diﬃculty, i.e. the  unreality of time.  A theory which
takes time to be a kind of fourth  dimension of space must, it
seems, regard the future as something already given, as
indubitably ﬁxed as the past.17 Time as a free creative
movement has no meaning for the theory. It does not pass.
Events do not happen; we simply meet them. It must  not,
however, be forgotten that the  theory neglects certain
characteristics of time as experienced by us; and it is not
possible to say that the nature of time  is exhausted by the
characteristics which the theory does note in the  interests of
a systematic account of those aspects of Nature which can
be mathematically treated.  Nor is it possible for us laymen
to understand what the real nature  of Einstein’s time is. It is
obvious that Einstein’s time is not Bergson’s pure duration.
Nor can we regard it as serial time. Serial time is the
essence of causality as deﬁned by Kant. The cause and its
eﬀect are mutually so related that  the former is
chronologically prior to the latter,  so that if the  former is
not, the latter cannot  be. If mathematical time  is serial time,
then on the basis of the theory it  is possible, by a careful
choice of the velocities of the observer and the system in
which a given set of events is happening, to make the eﬀect
precede its cause.18 It appears to me that time regarded as
a fourth dimension of space really ceases to be time. A
modern Russian writer, Ouspensky, in his book called
Tertium Organum, conceives the fourth dimension to be the
movement of a three-dimensional ﬁgure in a direction  not
contained in itself.19 Just as the movement of the point, the
line and the surface in a direction not contained in  them
gives us the ordinary three dimensions of space, in the

67
same way the movement of the three-dimensional ﬁgure  in
a direction not contained in itself  must give us the fourth
dimension of space. And since time is the distance
separating events in order of succession and binding them
in diﬀerent wholes, it is obviously a distance lying  in a
direction not contained in the three-dimensional  space. As a
new dimension this distance, separating events in the order
of succession, is incommensurable with the dimensions of
threedimensional space, as a year is incommensurable with
St. Petersburg. It is perpendicular to all directions of three-
dimensional space, and is not parallel to any of them.
Elsewhere in the same book Ouspensky describes our time-
sense as a misty space-sense and argues, on the basis of
our psychic constitution, that  to one-, two- or three-
dimensional beings the higher dimension must always
appear as succession in time. This obviously means that
what appears to us three-dimensional beings as time is in
reality an imperfectly  sensed space-dimension which in its
own nature does not diﬀer from the perfectly  sensed
dimensions of Euclidean space. In other words, time is not a
genuine creative movement; and that  what we call future
events are not fresh happenings, but things already given
and located in an unknown space. Yet in his search for a
fresh direction, other than the three  Euclidean dimensions,
Ouspensky needs a real serial time, i.e. a distance
separating events in the order of succession. Thus time
which was needed and consequently viewed as succession
for the purposes of one stage of the argument is quietly
divested, at a later stage, of its serial character  and reduced
to what does not diﬀer in anything  from the other lines and
dimensions of space. It is because of the serial character of
time that Ouspensky was able to regard it as a genuinely
new direction in space. If this characteristic is in reality  an
illusion, how can it fulﬁl Ouspensky’s requirements of an
original dimension?

68
Passing now to other levels of experience - life and
consciousness. Consciousness may be imagined as a
deﬂection from life. Its function  is to provide a luminous
point in order to enlighten  the forward rush of life.20 It is a
case of tension, a state of self-concentration, by means of
which life manages to shut out all memories and
associations which have no bearing on a present action. It
has no well-deﬁned fringes; it shrinks and expands as the
occasion demands. To describe it as an epiphenomenon of
the processes of matter is to deny it as an independent
activity, and to deny it  as an independent activity is to  deny
the validity of all  knowledge which is only a systematized
expression of consciousness. Thus consciousness is a
variety of the purely spiritual  principle of life which  is not a
substance, but an organizing principle, a speciﬁc mode of
behaviour essentially diﬀerent to  the behaviour of an
externally worked machine. Since, however, we cannot
conceive of a purely spiritual energy, except in association
with a deﬁnite combination  of sensible elements through
which it reveals itself, we are apt to take  this combination as
the ultimate ground of spiritual  energy. The discoveries of
Newton in the sphere of matter and those of Darwin in the
sphere of Natural History reveal a mechanism. All problems,
it was believed, were really the problems of physics. Energy
and atoms, with the properties self-existing in them,  could
explain everything including life,  thought, will, and feeling.
The concept of mechanism - a purely physical concept -
claimed to be the all-embracing explanation of  Nature. And
the battle for and against mechanism is still  being ﬁercely
fought in the domain of Biology. The question, then, is
whether the passage to Reality through the revelations of
sense-perception necessarily leads to a view of Reality
essentially opposed to the view that religion  takes of its
ultimate character. Is Natural Science ﬁnally committed  to
materialism? There is no doubt that the theories of science

69
constitute trustworthy  knowledge, because they are
veriﬁable and enable us to predict and control the  events of
Nature. But we must not forget that  what is called science is
not a single systematic view of Reality. It is a mass of
sectional views of Reality - fragments of a total experience
which do not seem to ﬁt together. Natural  Science deals
with matter, with  life, and with mind;  but the moment you
ask the question how matter, life, and mind  are mutually
related, you begin to see the sectional character of the
various sciences that deal with them and the inability  of
these sciences, taken singly, to furnish a complete answer
to your question. In fact, the various natural  sciences are
like so many vultures falling on the dead body of Nature,
and each running away with a piece of its ﬂesh. Nature as
the subject of science is a highly artiﬁcial aﬀair,  and this
artiﬁciality  is the result of that selective  process to which
science must subject her in the interests of precision. The
moment you put the subject of  science in the total of human
experience it begins to disclose a diﬀerent character. Thus
religion, which demands the whole of Reality and for this
reason must occupy a central place in any synthesis of all
the data of human experience, has no reason to be afraid of
any sectional views of Reality. Natural Science is by nature
sectional; it cannot, if it  is true to its own nature and
function, set up its theory as a complete view  of Reality. The
concepts we use in the organization of knowledge are,
therefore, sectional in character, and their application  is
relative to the level of experience  to which they are applied.
The concept of ‘cause’, for instance, the essential feature of
which is priority to the  eﬀect, is relative to the  subject-
matter of physical science which studies one special kind of
activity to the  exclusion of other forms of activity  observed
by others. When we rise to the level of life and mind the
concept of cause fails us, and we stand in need of concepts
of a diﬀerent order of thought.  The action of living
organisms, initiated and planned in view of an end, is totally

70
diﬀerent to causal action. The subject-matter  of our inquiry,
therefore, demands the concepts of ‘end’ and ‘purpose’,
which act from within unlike the  concept of cause which is
external to the eﬀect  and acts from without. No doubt, there
are aspects of the activity of a living  organism which it
shares with other objects of Nature. In the observation of
these aspects the concepts of physics and chemistry would
be needed; but the behaviour of the organism is essentially
a matter of inheritance and incapable of suﬃcient
explanation in terms of molecular physics. However, the
concept of mechanism has been applied to life and we have
to see how far the attempt  has succeeded. Unfortunately, I
am not a biologist and must turn to  biologists themselves
for support. After telling us that  the main diﬀerence
between a living organism and a machine is that the  former
is self-maintaining and self-reproducing, J.S. Haldane says: 
‘It is thus evident that  although we ﬁnd within  the living
body many phenomena which, so long as we do not look
closely, can be interpreted satisfactorily as physical and
chemical mechanism, there are side by side other
phenomena [i.e. self-maintenance and reproduction] for
which the possibility of such interpretation  seems to be
absent. The mechanists assume that the bodily mechanisms
are so constructed as to maintain, repair, and reproduce
themselves. In the long process of natural selection,
mechanisms of this sort have, they suggest, been evolved
gradually.

‘Let us examine this hypothesis. When we state an event in
mechanical terms we state it as a necessary result of
certain simple properties of separate parts which interact  in
the event. . . . The essence of the explanation or re-
statement of the event  is that after due investigation  we
have assumed that the parts interacting  in the event have
certain simple and deﬁnite properties,  so that they always
react in the same way under the same conditions. For a

71
mechanical explanation the reacting parts must  ﬁrst be
given. Unless an arrangement of parts with deﬁnite
properties is given, it is meaningless to speak of mechanical
explanation.

‘To postulate the existence of a self-producing or self-
maintaining mechanism is, thus, to postulate  something to
which no meaning can be attached. Meaningless terms are
sometimes used by physiologists; but there is none so
absolutely meaningless as the expression "mechanism of
reproduction". Any mechanism there may be in the parent
organism is absent in the process of reproduction, and must
reconstitute itself at  each generation, since the parent
organism is reproduced from a mere tiny speck of its own
body. There can be no mechanism of reproduction. The idea
of a mechanism which is constantly maintaining or
reproducing its own structure is self-contradictory. A
mechanism which reproduced itself would be a mechanism
without parts, and, therefore, not  a mechanism.’21

Life is, then, a unique phenomenon and the concept of
mechanism is inadequate for its analysis. Its ‘factual
wholeness’, to use an expression of Driesch - another
notable biologist - is a kind of unity which, looked at  from
another point of view, is also a plurality. In all the purposive
processes of growth and adaptation to its environment,
whether this adaptation is secured by the formation  of fresh
or the modiﬁcation of old habits,  it possesses a career which
is unthinkable in the case of a machine. And the possession
of a career means that the sources of its activity  cannot be
explained except in reference to a remote past, the origin  of
which, therefore, must be sought in a spiritual  reality
revealable in, but non-discoverable by, any analysis of
spatial experience. It would, therefore, seem that  life is
foundational and anterior to the  routine of physical and
chemical processes which must be regarded as a kind of

72
ﬁxed behaviour formed during a long course of evolution.
Further, the application of the mechanistic concepts to life,
necessitating the view that the  intellect itself  is a product of
evolution, brings science into conﬂict with  its own objective
principle of investigation. On this point  I will quote a
passage from Wildon Carr, who has given a very pointed
expression to this conﬂict:

‘If intellect is a product of  evolution the whole mechanistic
concept of the nature and origin of life  is absurd, and the
principle which science has adopted must clearly be revised.
We have only to state it to see the self-contradiction. How
can the intellect, a mode of apprehending reality,  be itself
an evolution of something which only exists as an
abstraction of that mode of apprehending,  which is the
intellect? If intellect is an evolution  of life, then the concept
of the life which can evolve intellect  as a particular mode of
apprehending reality must be the concept of  a more
concrete activity than that  of any abstract mechanical
movement which the intellect  can present to itself by
analysing its apprehended content. And yet further,  if the
intellect be a product of the  evolution of life, it is not
absolute but relative to the  activity of the  life which has
evolved it; how then, in such case, can science exclude the
subjective aspect of the knowing and build on the objective
presentation as an absolute? Clearly the biological sciences
necessitate a reconsideration of the scientiﬁc principle.’22

I will now try to reach the primacy  of life and thought by
another route, and carry you a step farther  in our
examination of experience. This will throw some further  light
on the primacy of life and will also give us an insight  into
the nature of life as a psychic activity. We have seen that
Professor Whitehead describes the universe, not as
something static, but as a structure  of events possessing
the character of a continuous creative ﬂow. This quality of

73
Nature’s passage in time is perhaps the most signiﬁcant
aspect of experience which the Qur’«n especially
emphasizes and which, as I hope to be able to show in the
sequel, oﬀers the best clue to the ultimate  nature of Reality.
To some of the verses (3:190-91; 2:164; 24:44)23 bearing on
the point I have already drawn your attention.  In view of the
great importance of the subject I will  add here a few more:

‘Verily, in the alternations of night  and of day and in all that
God hath created in the Heavens and in the earth are signs
to those who fear Him’ (10:6).
 ‘And it is He Who hath ordained the night and the day to
succeed one another for those who desire to think on God or
desire to be thankful’ (25:62).

‘Seest though not that God causeth the night to  come in
upon the day, and the day to come in upon the night;  and
that He hath subjected the sun and the moon to laws by
which each speedeth along to an appointed goal?’ (31:29).

‘It is of Him that the  night returneth on the  day, and that the
day returneth on the night’  (39:5).
 ‘And of Him is the change of the night and of the day’
(23:80).

There is another set of verses which, indicating the relativity
of our reckoning of time, suggests the possibility of
unknown levels of consciousness;24 but I will content myself
with a discussion of the familiar, yet deeply  signiﬁcant,
aspect of experience alluded to in the verses quoted above.
Among the representatives of contemporary thought
Bergson is the only thinker who has made a keen study of
the phenomenon of duration in time.  I will ﬁrst brieﬂy
explain to you his view of duration and then point  out the
inadequacy of his analysis in order fully to bring out  the
implications of a completer view of the  temporal aspect of

74
existence. The ontological problem before us is how to
deﬁne the ultimate nature  of existence. That the universe
persists in time is not open to doubt. Yet, since it is external
to us, it is possible to be sceptical about its existence. In
order completely to grasp the meaning of this  persistence in
time we must be in a position to study  some privileged case
of existence which is absolutely unquestionable and gives
us the further assurance of a direct vision of duration.  Now
my perception of things that  confront me is superﬁcial and
external; but my perception of  my own self is internal,
intimate, and profound. It follows, therefore,  that conscious
experience is that privileged case of existence in which we
are in absolute contact with Reality, and an analysis of this
privileged case is likely to throw a ﬂood of light  on the
ultimate meaning of existence. What do I ﬁnd when I ﬁx  my
gaze on my own conscious experience? In the words of
Bergson: 
‘I pass from state to state. I am warm or cold. I am merry  or
sad, I work or I do nothing, I look at what is around me or I
think of something else. Sensations, feelings, volitions,
ideas - such are the changes into which my existence is
divided and which colour it in turns. I change then,  without
ceasing.’25

Thus, there is nothing static in my inner life;  all is a constant
mobility, an unceasing ﬂux of states, a perpetual  ﬂow in
which there is no halt or resting place. Constant change,
however, is unthinkable without time.  On the analogy of our
inner experience, then, conscious existence means life in
time. A keener insight into the nature  of conscious
experience, however, reveals that the self in its inner  life
moves from the centre outwards. It has, so to speak, two
sides which may be described as appreciative and eﬃcient.
On its eﬃcient side it enters into  relation with what we call
the world of space. The eﬃcient self is the subject of
associationist psychology - the practical self of daily life in

75
its dealing with the external  order of things which determine
our passing states of consciousness and stamp on these
states their own spatial feature of mutual  isolation. The self
here lives outside itself as it were, and, while retaining  its
unity as a totality,  discloses itself as nothing more than a
series of speciﬁc and consequently numberable states. The
time in which the eﬃcient  self lives is, therefore, the time  of
which we predicate long and short. It is hardly
distinguishable from space. We can conceive it only as a
straight line composed of spatial points which are external
to one another like so many stages in a journey. But time
thus regarded is not true time, according to  Bergson.
Existence in spatialized time is spurious existence. A deeper
analysis of conscious experience reveals to us what I have
called the appreciative side of the self. With our absorption
in the external order of things, necessitated by  our present
situation, it is extremely  diﬃcult to  catch a glimpse of the
appreciative self. In our constant pursuit after external
things we weave a kind of veil round the appreciative  self
which thus becomes completely alien to us. It is only in the
moments of profound meditation, when the  eﬃcient self is
in abeyance, that we sink into our deeper self and reach the
inner centre of experience. In the life-process of this deeper
ego the states of consciousness melt into each other. The
unity of the appreciative  ego is like the unity of the germ  in
which the experiences of its individual ancestors exist, not
as a plurality, but as a unity in which every  experience
permeates the whole. There is no numerical distinctness of
states in the totality  of the ego, the multiplicity  of whose
elements is, unlike that of the eﬃcient  self, wholly
qualitative. There is change and movement, but change and
movement are indivisible; their  elements interpenetrate  and
are wholly non-serial in character. It appears that the time  of
the appreciative-self is a single ‘now’ which the  eﬃcient
self, in its traﬃc with  the world of space, pulverizes into a
series of ‘nows’ like pearl beads in a thread. Here is, then,

76
pure duration unadulterated by space. The Qur’«n with its
characteristic simplicity alludes to  the serial and non-serial
aspects of duration in the following verses:

‘And put thou thy trust  in Him that liveth  and dieth not, and
celebrate His praise Who in six days created the Heavens
and the earth, and what is between them, then  mounted His
Throne; the God of mercy’ (25:58-59).

‘All things We have created with a ﬁxed destiny: Our
command was but one, swift as the twinkling of an eye’
(54:49-50).

If we look at the movement embodied in creation  from the
outside, that is to say, if we apprehend it  intellectually, it  is
a process lasting through thousands of years; for one Divine
day, in the terminology of the  Qur’«n, as of the Old
Testament, is equal to one thousand years.26 From another
point of view, the process of creation, lasting through
thousands of years, is a single indivisible act, ‘swift as the
twinkling of an eye’. It is, however, impossible  to express
this inner experience of pure duration in words, for language
is shaped on the serial time of our daily eﬃcient  self.
Perhaps an illustration will further elucidate the  point.
According to physical science, the cause of your sensation
of red is the rapidity of wave motion  the frequency of which
is 400 billions per second. If you could observe this
tremendous frequency from the outside, and count it  at the
rate of 2,000 per second, which is supposed to be the limit
of the perceptibility  of light, it will  take you more than six
thousand years to ﬁnish the enumeration.27 Yet in the single
momentary mental act of perception  you hold together a
frequency of wave motion which is practically incalculable.
That is how the mental act transforms succession into
duration. The appreciative self, then, is more or less
corrective of the eﬃcient  self, inasmuch as it synthesizes all

77
the ‘heres’ and ‘nows’ - the small changes of space and
time, indispensable to the eﬃcient  self - into the coherent
wholeness of personality. Pure time, then, as revealed by a
deeper analysis of our conscious experience, is not a string
of separate, reversible instants; it is an organic whole in
which the past is not left behind, but  is moving along with,
and operating in, the present. And the future  is given to it
not as lying before, yet to be traversed;  it is given only in
the sense that it is present in its nature  as an open
possibility.28 It is time regarded as an organic whole that the
Qur’«n describes as Taqdâr or the destiny - a word which
has been so much misunderstood both in and outside the
world of Islam. Destiny is time regarded as prior to the
disclosure of its possibilities. It is time freed from  the net of
causal sequence - the diagrammatic character which the
logical understanding imposes on it. In one word, it is time
as felt and not as thought and calculated. If you ask me why
the Emperor Huma«yën and Sh«h Tahm«sp of Persia were
contemporaries, I can give you no causal explanation. The
only answer that can possibly be given is that the nature  of
Reality is such that among its inﬁnite possibilities of
becoming, the two possibilities known as the lives of
Hum«yën and Sh«h Tahm«sp should realize themselves
together. Time regarded as destiny forms the very essence
of things. As the Qur’«n says: ‘God created all things and
assigned to each its destiny.’29 The destiny of a thing then is
not an unrelenting fate working  from without like a task
master; it is the inward reach of a thing,  its realizable
possibilities which lie within the depths  of its nature, and
serially actualize themselves without any feeling  of external
compulsion. Thus the organic wholeness of duration does
not mean that full-ﬂedged  events are lying, as it were, in the
womb of Reality, and drop one by one like the grains of sand
from the hour-glass. If time is real, and not a mere repetition
of homogeneous moments which make conscious

78
experience a delusion, then every moment in the life  of
Reality is original, giving birth to what  is absolutely novel
and unforeseeable. ‘Everyday doth some new work employ
Him’,30 says the Qur’«n. To exist in real time is not to be
bound by the fetters of serial time,  but to create it  from
moment to moment and to  be absolutely free and original in
creation. In fact, all creative activity  is free activity. Creation
is opposed to repetition which is a characteristic of
mechanical action. That is why it is impossible to explain the
creative activity of life  in terms of mechanism. Science
seeks to establish uniformities of experience, i.e. the laws of
mechanical repetition. Life with its  intense feeling of
spontaneity constitutes a centre of indetermination,  and
thus falls outside the domain of necessity. Hence science
cannot comprehend life. The biologist who seeks a
mechanical explanation of life is led to do so because he
conﬁnes his study to the lower forms of life whose behaviour
discloses resemblances to mechanical action. If he studies
life as manifested in himself, i.e. his own mind freely
choosing, rejecting, reﬂecting, surveying the  past and the
present, and dynamically imagining the future,  he is sure to
be convinced of the inadequacy of his mechanical concepts.

On the analogy of our conscious experience, then, the
universe is a free creative movement. But how can we
conceive a movement independent of a concrete thing that
moves? The answer is that the notion of ‘things’ is
derivative. We can derive ‘things’ from  movement; we
cannot derive movement from immobile  things. If, for
instance, we suppose material atoms, such as the atoms of
Democritus, to be the original Reality, we must import
movement into them from  the outside as something alien to
their nature. Whereas if we take movement as original,
static things may be derived from  it. In fact, physical
science has reduced all things to movement. The essential
nature of the atom in modern science is electricity  and not

79
something electriﬁed. Apart from  this, things are not given
in immediate experience as things already possessing
deﬁnite contours, for immediate  experience is a continuity
without any distinctions in  it. What we call things are events
in the continuity of  Nature which thought spatializes and
thus regards as mutually isolated for purposes of action. The
universe which seems to us to be a collection of things is
not a solid stuﬀ occupying a void. It is not a thing  but an act.
The nature of thought according to Bergson is serial; it
cannot deal with movement, except by  viewing it as a series
of stationary points. It is, therefore,  the operation of
thought, working with  static concepts, that gives the
appearance of a series of immobilities to what is essentially
dynamic in its nature. The co-existence and succession of
these immobilities is the source of what we call space and
time.

According to Bergson, then, Reality is a free unpredictable,
creative, vital impetus of the  nature of volition which
thought spatializes and views as a plurality of ‘things’.  A full
criticism of this view cannot be undertaken  here. Suﬃce it
to say that the vitalism  of Bergson ends in an
insurmountable dualism of will and thought.  This is really
due to the partial view of  intelligence that he takes.
Intelligence, according to him, is a spatializing activity;  it is
shaped on matter alone, and has only mechanical
categories at its disposal. But, as I pointed out in my ﬁrst
lecture, thought has a deeper movement also.31 While it
appears to break up Reality into static fragments, its  real
function is to synthesize the elements of experience by
employing categories suitable to the various levels which
experience presents. It is as much organic as life. The
movement of life, as an organic growth, involves a
progressive synthesis of its various stages. Without this
synthesis it will cease to be organic growth. It is determined
by ends, and the presence of ends means that it is

80
permeated by intelligence. Nor is the activity  of intelligence
possible without the presence of ends. In conscious
experience life and thought permeate each other. They form
a unity. Thought, therefore, in its true nature,  is identical
with life. Again, in Bergson’s view the forward rush of the
vital impulse in its creative  freedom is unilluminated by the
light of an immediate or a remote  purpose. It is not aiming
at a result; it is wholly arbitrary,  undirected, chaotic, and
unforeseeable in its behaviour. It is mainly here that
Bergson’s analysis of our conscious experience reveals its
inadequacy. He regards conscious experience as the past
moving along with and operating in the  present. He ignores
that the unity  of consciousness has a forward looking aspect
also. Life is only a series of acts of attention, and an act of
attention is inexplicable without  reference to a purpose,
conscious or unconscious. Even our acts of perception are
determined by our immediate  interests and purposes. The
Persian poet ‘urfâ’ has given a beautiful expression to this
aspect of human perception. He says:32

‘If your heart is not deceived by the  mirage, be not proud of
the sharpness of your understanding; 
for your freedom from this optical  illusion is due to your
imperfect thirst.’

The poet means to say that if you had a vehement desire for
drink, the sands of the desert would have given you the
impression of a lake. Your freedom from the illusion is due to
the absence of a keen desire for water. You have perceived
the thing as it is because you were not interested in
perceiving it as it is not. Thus ends and purposes, whether
they exist as conscious or subconscious tendencies, form
the warp and woof of our conscious experience. And the
notion of purpose cannot be understood except in reference
to the future. The past, no doubt, abides and operates in the
present; but this operation of the  past in the present is not

81
the whole of consciousness. The element of purpose
discloses a kind of forward look in consciousness. Purposes
not only colour our present states of consciousness, but also
reveal its future direction. In fact,  they constitute the
forward push of our life, and thus in a way anticipate  and
inﬂuence the states that are yet  to be. To be determined by
an end is to be determined by what ought to  be. Thus past
and future both operate in the  present state of
consciousness, and the future is not wholly undetermined as
Bergson’s analysis of our conscious experience shows. A
state of attentive  consciousness involves both memory and
imagination as operating factors. On the analogy of our
conscious experience, therefore, Reality is not a blind vital
impulse wholly unilluminated by idea. Its  nature is through
and through teleological.

Bergson, however, denies the teleological character of
Reality on the ground that teleology makes time unreal.
According to him ‘the portals of the future  must remain wide
open to Reality’. Otherwise, it will not be free and creative.
No doubt, if teleology means the working out of  a plan in
view of a predetermined end or goal, it does make time
unreal. It reduces the universe to a mere temporal
reproduction of a pre-existing eternal scheme or structure  in
which individual events have already found their  proper
places, waiting, as it were, for their respective  turns to enter
into the temporal sweep of history. All is already given
somewhere in eternity; the temporal  order of events is
nothing more than a mere imitation  of the eternal mould.
Such a view is hardly distinguishable from mechanism which
we have already rejected.33 In fact, it is a kind of veiled
materialism in which fate or destiny  takes the place of rigid
determinism, leaving no scope for human or even Divine
freedom. The world regarded as a process realizing a
preordained goal is not a world of free, responsible moral
agents; it is only a stage on which puppets are made to

82
move by a kind of pull from behind. There is, however,
another sense of teleology. From our conscious experience
we have seen that to live is to shape and change ends and
purposes and to be governed by them. Mental life is
teleological in the sense that, while there  is no far-oﬀ distant
goal towards which we are moving, there is a progressive
formation of fresh ends, purposes, and ideal scales of value
as the process of life grows and expands. We become by
ceasing to be what we are. Life is a passage through a
series of deaths. But there is a system in the continuity  of
this passage. Its various stages, in spite of the apparently
abrupt changes in our evaluation of things, are organically
related to one another. The life-history of the individual  is,
on the whole, a unity and not a mere series of mutually  ill-
adapted events. The world-process, or the movement of the
universe in time, is certainly devoid of  purpose, if by
purpose we mean a foreseen end - a far-oﬀ ﬁxed destination
to which the whole creation moves. To endow the world-
process with purpose in this sense is to rob it of its
originality and its creative  character. Its ends are
terminations of a career; they are ends to come and not
necessarily premeditated. A timeprocess cannot be
conceived as a line already drawn. It is a line in the drawing
- an actualization of open possibilities. It is purposive only in
this sense that it is selective in character,  and brings itself
to some sort of a present fulﬁlment  by actively preserving
and supplementing the past. To my mind nothing is more
alien to the Quranic outlook than the idea that  the universe
is the temporal working out of a preconceived plan. As I
have already pointed out, the universe, according to the
Qur’«n, is liable to increase.34 It is a growing universe and
not an already completed product which left  the hand of its
maker ages ago, and is now lying stretched in space as a
dead mass of matter to which time does nothing,  and
consequently is nothing. 

83
We are now, I hope, in a position to see the meaning of the
verse - ‘And it is He Who hath ordained the night and the
day to succeed one another for those who desire to think on
God or desire to be thankful.’35 A critical interpretation of
the sequence of time as revealed in ourselves has led us to
a notion of the Ultimate Reality as pure duration in which
thought, life, and purpose interpenetrate  to form an organic
unity. We cannot conceive this unity except as the unity of a
self - an all-embracing concrete self - the ultimate  source of
all individual life and thought.  I venture to think  that the
error of Bergson consists in regarding pure time as prior to
self, to which alone pure duration is predicable. Neither pure
space nor pure time can hold together the multiplicity  of
objects and events. It is the appreciative act of an enduring
self only which can seize the multiplicity  of duration - broken
up into an inﬁnity of  instants - and transform it to  the
organic wholeness of a synthesis. To exist in pure duration is
to be a self, and to be a self is to be able to say ‘I am’. Only
that truly exists which  can say ‘I am’. It is the degree of the
intuition of ‘I-amness’ that  determines the place of a thing
in the scale of being. We too say ‘I am’. But our ‘I-amness’ is
dependent and arises out of the distinction between  the self
and the not-self. The Ultimate Self, in the words of the
Qur’«n, ‘can aﬀord to dispense with all the worlds’.36 To Him
the not-self does not present itself as a confronting ‘other’,
or else it would have to be, like our ﬁnite  self, in spatial
relation with the confronting  ‘other’. What we call Nature or
the not-self is only a ﬂeeting moment  in the life of God. His
‘I-amness’ is independent, elemental, absolute.37 Of such a
self it is impossible for us to form an adequate conception.
As the Qur’«n says, ‘Naught’ is like Him; yet ‘He hears and
sees’.38 Now a self is unthinkable without a character, i.e. a
uniform mode of behaviour. Nature, as we have seen, is not
a mass of pure materiality occupying a void. It is a structure
of events, a systematic mode of behaviour, and as such

84
organic to the Ultimate Self. Nature is to the Divine Self as
character is to the human self. In the picturesque phrase of
the Qur’«n it is the habit  of Allah.39 From the human point of
view it is an interpretation  which, in our present situation,
we put on the creative activity  of the Absolute Ego. At a
particular moment in its  forward movement it  is ﬁnite; but
since the self to which it is organic is creative, it  is liable to
increase, and is consequently boundless in the sense that
no limit to its extension  is ﬁnal. Its boundlessness is
potential, not actual. Nature, then,  must be understood as a
living, evergrowing organism whose growth has no ﬁnal
external limits. Its only limit  is internal, i.e. the  immanent
self which animates and sustains the whole. As the Qur’«n
says: ‘And verily unto thy Lord is the limit’  (53:42). Thus the
view that we have taken gives a fresh spiritual meaning  to
physical science. The knowledge of Nature is the knowledge
of God’s behaviour. In our observation of Nature we are
virtually seeking a kind of intimacy  with the Absolute Ego;
and this is only another form of worship.40

The above discussion takes time as an essential element in
the Ultimate Reality. The next point before us, therefore, is
to consider the late Doctor McTaggart’s argument relating to
the unreality of time.41 Time, according to Doctor
McTaggart, is unreal because every event is past, present,
and future. Queen Anne’s death, for instance, is past to us;
it was present to her contemporaries and future  to William
III. Thus the event of Anne’s death combines characteristics
which are incompatible with each other. It is obvious that
the argument proceeds on the assumption that the  serial
nature of time is ﬁnal. If we regard past, present,  and future
as essential to time, then we picture time  as a straight line,
part of which we have travelled and left  behind, and part
lies yet untravelled before us. This is taking time, not  as a
living creative moment, but  as a static absolute, holding the

85
ordered multiplicity of  fullyshaped cosmic events, revealed
serially, like the pictures of a ﬁlm,  to the outside observer.
We can indeed say that Queen Anne’s death was future to
William III, if this event is regarded as already fully shaped,
and lying in the future, waiting  for its happening. But a
future event, as Broad justly points out, cannot be
characterized as an event.42 Before the death of Anne the
event of her death did not exist  at all. During Anne’s life the
event of her death existed only as an unrealized possibility
in the nature of Reality which included it as an event only
when, in the course of its becoming, it reached the point  of
the actual happening of that event.  The answer to Doctor
McTaggart’s argument is that the future exists only as an
open possibility, and not as a reality. Nor can it be said that
an event combines incompatible characteristics when it  is
described both as past and present. When an event X does
happen it enters into an unalterable  relation with all the
events that have happened before it. These relations are not
at all aﬀected by the relations  of X with other events which
happen after X by the further becoming of  Reality. No true
or false proposition about these relations will ever become
false or true. Hence there is no logical diﬃculty  in regarding
an event as both past and present. It must be confessed,
however, that the point is not  free from diﬃculty  and
requires much further thinking.  It is not easy to solve the
mystery of time.43 Augustine’s profound words are as true
today as they were when they were uttered:  ‘If no one
questions me of time, I know it: if  I would explain to a
questioner I know it not.’44 Personally, I am inclined to think
that time is an essential element in  Reality. But real time is
not serial time to which the  distinction of past, present, and
future is essential; it is pure duration,  i.e. change without
succession, which McTaggart’s argument does not touch.
Serial time is pure duration pulverized by thought  - a kind of
device by which Reality exposes its ceaseless creative

86
activity to quantitative  measurement. It  is in this sense that
the Qur’«n says: ‘And of Him is the change of the night and
of the day.’45

But the question you are likely to ask is - ‘Can change be
predicated of the Ultimate Ego?’ We, as human beings, are
functionally related to an independent  world-process. The
conditions of our life are mainly external  to us. The only kind
of life known to us is desire, pursuit, failure, or attainment  -
a continuous change from one situation to another. From our
point of view life is change, and change is essentially
imperfection. At the same time, since our conscious
experience is the only point of departure for  all knowledge,
we cannot avoid the limitation  of interpreting  facts in the
light of our own inner experience. An anthropomorphic
conception is especially unavoidable in the apprehension of
life; for life can be apprehended from within  only. As the
poet N«sir ‘Alâ of Sirhind imagines the idol saying to the
Brahmin:

‘Thou hast made me after Thine own image! After all what
hast Thou seen beyond Thyself?’46

It was the fear of conceiving Divine life after  the image of
human life that the Spanish Muslim theologian Ibn Àazm
hesitated to predicate life of God, and ingeniously
suggested that God should be described as living, not
because He is living in the sense of our experience of life,
but only because He is so described in the Qur’«n.47
Conﬁning himself to the surface of our conscious experience
and ignoring its deeper phases, Ibn Àazm must have taken
life as a serial change, a succession of attitudes towards an
obstructing environment. Serial change is obviously a mark
of imperfection; and, if we conﬁne ourselves to this  view of
change, the diﬃculty of reconciling  Divine perfection with
Divine life becomes insuperable. Ibn Àazm must have felt

87
that the perfection  of God can be retained only at the cost
of His life. There is, however, a way out of the diﬃculty. The
Absolute Ego, as we have seen, is the whole of Reality. He is
not so situated as to take a perspective view of an alien
universe; consequently, the phases of His life are wholly
determined from within.  Change, therefore, in the sense of a
movement from an imperfect  to a relatively perfect  state, or
vice versa, is obviously inapplicable to His life. But change
in this sense is not the only possible form of life. A deeper
insight into our conscious experience shows that beneath
the appearance of serial duration there is true duration.  The
Ultimate Ego exists in pure duration wherein change ceases
to be a succession of varying attitudes, and reveals its true
character as continuous creation, ‘untouched by
weariness’48 and unseizable ‘by slumber or sleep’.49 To
conceive the Ultimate Ego as changeless in this sense of
change is to conceive Him as utter inaction, a motiveless,
stagnant neutrality,  an absolute nothing. To the Creative
Self change cannot mean imperfection. The perfection of
the Creative Self consists, not in a mechanistically
conceived immobility, as Aristotle might  have led Ibn Àazm
to think. It consists in the vaster  basis of His creative
activity and the inﬁnite  scope of His creative vision. God’s
life is self-revelation, not the pursuit  of an ideal to be
reached. The ‘not-yet’ of man does mean pursuit and may
mean failure; the ‘not-yet’  of God means unfailing
realization of the inﬁnite  creative possibilities of His being
which retains its wholeness throughout the entire  process.

In the Endless, self-repeating 
ﬂows for evermore The Same. Myriad arches, springing,
meeting, hold at rest the mighty  frame. 
Streams from all things love of living, grandest star  and
humblest clod. All the straining, all the  striving is eternal
peace in God.50 (GOETHE)

88
Thus a comprehensive philosophical criticism of all the facts
of experience on its eﬃcient as well as appreciative  side
brings us to the conclusion that the  Ultimate Reality is a
rationally directed creative  life. To interpret this life as an
ego is not to fashion God after the image of man. It  is only
to accept the simple fact of  experience that life is not a
formless ﬂuid, but an organizing principle  of unity, a
synthetic activity  which holds together and focalizes the
dispersing dispositions of the living organism for a
constructive purpose. The operation of thought  which is
essentially symbolic in character veils the true  nature of life,
and can picture it only as a kind of universal current  ﬂowing
through all things. The result of an intellectual  view of life,
therefore, is necessarily pantheistic. But we have a ﬁrst-
hand knowledge of the appreciative aspect of life  from
within. Intuition  reveals life as a centralizing ego. This
knowledge, however imperfect as giving us only a point  of
departure, is a direct revelation of  the ultimate nature  of
Reality. Thus the facts of experience justify the inference
that the ultimate  nature of Reality is spiritual,  and must be
conceived as an ego. But the aspiration of religion soars
higher than that  of philosophy. Philosophy is an intellectual
view of things; and, as such, does not care to go beyond a
concept which can reduce all the rich variety  of experience
to a system. It sees Reality from a distance as it were.
Religion seeks a closer contact with Reality. The one is
theory; the other  is living experience, association, intimacy.
In order to achieve this intimacy  thought must rise higher
than itself, and ﬁnd its  fulﬁlment in  an attitude of mind
which religion describes as prayer - one of the last words on
the lips of the Prophet of Islam.51

Lecture  II  Notes:  THE PHILOSOPHICAL TEST OF THE
REVELATIONS OF RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE
 1. Cf. E.S. Haldane and G.R.T. Ross (trs.), The Philosophical
Works of Descartes, II, 57.

89
 2. Cf. The Critique of Pure Reason, trans. N.’Kemp Smith, p.
505.
 3. The logical fallacy of assuming in the premisses of that
which is to be proved in the conclusion.
 4. Qur’«n, 41:53, also 51:20-21. 5. Ibid., 57:3.
 6. Cf. R.F.A. Hoernle, Matter, Life, Mind and God, pp. 69-70.

7. Cf. H. Barker, article ‘Berkeley’ in Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics, especially the section; ‘Metaphysics of
Immaterialism’; see also Lecture IV, p. 83, for Allama Iqbal’s
acute observations in refutation  of ‘the hypothesis of matter
as an independent existence’.

8. Cf. A.N. Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, p. 30. This is
what Whitehead has called the ‘theory of  bifurcation of
Nature’ based on the dichotomy of ‘simply  located material
bodies of Newtonian physics’ and the ‘pure sensations’ of
Hume. According to this theory, Nature is split up into  two
disparate or isolated parts; the  one known to us through our
immediate experiences of colours, sounds, scents, etc., and
the other, the world  of unperceived scientiﬁc entities of
molecules, atoms, electrons, ether, etc. - colourless,
soundless, unscented - which so act upon the mind through
‘impact’ as to produce in it  the ‘illusions’ of sensory
experiences in which it delights. The theory thus divides
totality  of being into a reality which does not appear and is
thus a mere ‘conjecture’ and appearances which are not
real and so are mere ‘dream’. Whitehead outright  rejects
‘bifurcation’;  and insists that the red glow of sunset is as
much ‘part of Nature’  as the vibrations of molecules and
that the scientist  cannot dismiss the red glow as a ‘psychic
addition’ if he is to  have a coherent ‘Concept of Nature’.
This view of Whitehead, the eminent mathematician,
expounded by him in 1920 (i.e. four years before his
appointment to the  chair of Philosophy at Harvard at the
age of sixty-three) was widely accepted by the  philosophers.

90
Lord Richard Burdon Haldane, one of the leading neo-
Hegelian British philosophers, said to be the ﬁrst
philosophical writer on the Theory of Relativity,  gave full
support to Whitehead’s views on ‘bifurcation’  as well as on
‘Relativity’ in his widely-read Reign of Relativity to  which
Allama Iqbal refers in Lecture III, p. 57, and tacitly also
perhaps in lecture V. The way Lord Haldane has stated in
this work his defence of Whitehead’s views of Relativity
(enunciated by him especially in Concept of Nature) even as
against those of Einstein, one is inclined to surmise that it
was perhaps Reign of Relativity (incidentally also listed at S.
No. 276 in the Descriptive Catalogue of Allama’s Personal
Library) more than any other work that  led Allama Iqbal to
make the observation: ‘Whitehead’s view of Relativity  is
likely to appeal to Muslim students more than  that of
Einstein in whose theory time loses its character of passage
and mysteriously translates itself  into utter space’ (Lecture
V, p. 106).

9. Allama Iqbal states here Zeno’s ﬁrst and third arguments;
for all the four arguments  of Zeno on the unreality of
motion, see John Burnet, Greek philosophy; Thales to Plato,
p. 84; they generally go by names; the  ‘dichotomy’; the
‘Achilles’; the ‘arrow’;  and the ‘stadium’. It  may be added
that our primary  source for Zeno’s famous and controversial
arguments is Aristotle Physics (VI, 9, 239b) which is
generally said to have been ﬁrst translated  into Arabic by
IsÁ«q b. Àunain (c. 845-910/911), the son of the celebrated
Àunain b. IsÁ«q. Aristotle’s Physics is also said to have been
commented on later by the  Christian Abë’Alâal-Àasan b. al-
Samh (c. 945-1027); cf. S.M. Stern, ‘Ibn-al-Samh’, Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society (1956), pp. 31-44. Even so it seems
that Zeno’s arguments as stated by Aristotle  were known to
the Muslim thinkers much earlier, maybe through  Christian-
Syriac sources, for one ﬁnds the brilliant Mu‘tazilite  Naïï«m
(d. 231/845) meeting Zeno’s ﬁrst  argument in terms of his

91
ingenious idea of tafrah jump referred to  by Allama Iqbal in
Lecture III, pp. 63-64.

10. Cf. T.J. de Boer, article ‘Atomic Theory (Muhammadan)’,
in Encyclopaedia of Religion and EthicsEncyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics
203; D.B. Macdonald, Development of Muslim Theology, pp.
201 ﬀ. and Majid Fakhry, Islamic Occasionalism, pp. 33-43.

11. Cf. Kit«b al-FiÄal, V, 92-102.
 12. For Bergson’s criticism of Zeno’s arguments cf. Creative
Evolution, pp. 325-30, and also the earlier work Time and
Free Will, pp.113-15.
 13. Cf. A.E. Taylor, article ‘Continuity’ in Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics, IV, 97-98.
 14. Cf. Bertrand Russell, Our Knowledge of the External
World, pp. 169-88;
 also Mysticism and Logic, pp. 84-91.
 15. This is not Russell’s own statement but that of H. Wildon
Carr made during the course of his exposition of Russell’s
views on the subject; see Wildon Carr, The General Principle
of Relativity, p. 36.

16. Views of H. Wildon Carr and especially of Sir T. Percy
Nunn on relativity in the  present context are to be found in
their symposium papers on ‘The Idealistic Interpretation  of
Einstein’s Theory’ published in the Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, N.S. XXII (1921-22), 123-27 and 127-30.
Wildon Carr’s, Doctrine of Monadistic Idealism, however, is
to be found much more fully expounded in his General
Principle of Relativity (1920) and A Theory of Monads:
Outlines of the Philosophy of the Principle of Relativity
(1922); passages from both of these books have been
quoted in the present lecture  (cf. notes 15 and 22).

92
T. Percy Nunn, best known as an educationist, wrote little
philosophy; but whatever little  he wrote, it  made him quite
inﬂuential with  the leading contemporary British
philosophers: Whitehead, Samuel Alexander, Russell, Broad,
and others. He is said to have ﬁrst formulated the
characteristic doctrines of neo-Realism, an important
philosophical school of the century which had its zealot and
able champions both in England and in the United States.
His famous symposium paper: ‘Are Secondary Qualities
Independent of Perception?’ read in a meeting of the
Aristotelian Society in 1909 was widely studied and
discussed and as J. Passmore puts it: ‘it struck Bertrand
Russell’s roving fancy’ (A Hundred Years of Philosophy, p.
258). It is signiﬁcant to note  that Nunn’s correction put on
Wildon Carr’s idealistic interpretation of  relativity in the
present passage is to be found almost in the same
philosophical diction in Russell’s valuable article: ‘Relativity;
Philosophical Consequences’, in Encyclopaedia Britannica
(1953), XIX, 99d, Russell says: ‘It is a mistake to suppose
that relativity  adopts any idealistic picture  of the world . . . .
The ‘observer’ who is often mentioned in expositions of
relativity  need not be a mind, but may be a photographic
plate or any kind of recording instrument.’

17. On this rather debatable interpretation  of Einstein’s
theory of relativity  see Dr M. Razi-ud-dân Âiddâqâ, ‘Iqbal’s
Conception of Time and Space’ in Iqbal As A Thinker, pp. 29-
31, and Philipp Frank, ‘Philosophical Interpretations and
Misinterpretations of the Theory of Relativity’,  in H. Feigel
and Mary Broadbeck (eds.), Readings in the Philosophy of
Science, pp. 222-26, reprinted from his valuable work.
Interpretations and Misinterpretations of  Modern Physics
(1938).

18. Cf. Hans Reichenbach, ‘The Philosophical Signiﬁcance of
the Theory of Relativity’, in P.A. Schilpp (ed.), Albert-

93
Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, section iv.
 19. Cf. Tertium Organum, pp. 33f.
 20. Compare this with Bergson’s view of consciousness in
Creative Evolution, pp. 189f.

21. This is a passage from J.S. Haldane’s Symposium Paper:
‘Are Physical, Biological and Psychological Categories
Irreducible?’ read in July 1918 at the joint session of the
Aristotelian Society, the British Psychological Society and
the Mind Association; see Proceedings of the Aristotelian
SocietyProceedings of the Aristotelian Society 1918), 423-
24, reproduced in H. Wildon Carr (ed.), Life and Finite
Individuality, pp. 15-16.

22. A Theory of Monads, pp. 5-6.
 23. Cf. Lecture I, pp. 8-11.
 24. Cf. the Quranic verses quoted on p. 39; to these may be
added 22:47, 32:5, and 70:4 - according to this last  verse a
day is of the measure of ﬁfty thousand  years.
 25. Creative Evolution, p. 1.
 26. The Qur’«n says: ‘And behold a day with thy sustainer is
as a thousand years of your reckoning’ (22:47). So also,
according to the Old Testament: ‘One day is with the Lord as
a thousand years’ (Psalms, xc.’4).
 27. According to Bergson, this period may be as long as
25,000 years; cf. Matter and Memory, pp. 272-73.

28. For further elucidation of future  as an open possibility’
cf. Lecture III, p.’63.
29. See among others the Quranic verses 25:2; 54:49 and
the earliest on this subject in the  chronological order of the
sërahs: 87:2-3.

These last two short verses speak of four Divine ways
governing all creation and so also man, viz. God’s creating a
thing (khalaqa), making it  complete (fa sawwa), assigning a

94
destiny to it or determining  its nature (qaddara)  and guiding
it to its fulﬁlment  (fa hada).

Allama Iqbal’s conception of destiny ( taqdâr) as ‘the  inward
reach of a thing, its realizable possibilities which lie within
the depth of its nature,  and serially actualize themselves
without any feeling of  external compulsion’ [italics  mine]
understood in terms of the Divine ways embodied in the
above two short verses, seems to be singularly close to the
text and the unique thought-forms  of the Qur’«n. There is no
place in this conception of destiny for  the doctrine of
Fatalism as preached by some Muslim scholastic theologians
whose interpretation of the  verses of the Qur’«n for this
purpose is more often a palpable misinterpretation  (Lecture
IV, p. 89); nor for the doctrine of determinism  as expounded
by the philosophers who, cut oﬀ from the  inner life-impulse
given by Islam, think of all things  in terms of the inexorable
law of cause and eﬀect which governs the human ego as
much as the ‘environment’  in which it is placed. They fail to
realize that the origin of  the law of ‘cause and eﬀect’ lies in
the depths of the transcendental  ego which has devised it or
caused it under divine guidance to realize its divinely
assigned destiny of understanding and mastering all things
(p. 86); also Asr«r-i Khudâ, many verses especially those in
the earlier sections.

30. Qur’«n, 55:29.
 31. Cf. Lecture I, p. 5.
 32. See Shiblâ Nu‘m«nâ, Shi‘r al-‘Ajam, II, 114.
 33. This is a reference to pp. 33-36.
 34. Cf. Lecture I, p. 8 and note 23.
 35. The Quranic verse 25:62 quoted on p. 37.
 36. Reference is to the Quranic expression: Ghanâyy-un
‘ani’i-’«lamân found  in verses 3:97 and 29:6.
 37. This is a reference to the Quranic verse 20:14: ‘Verily, I -
I alone - am God; there is no deity save Me. Hence, worship

95
Me alone, and be constant in prayer, so as to remember
Me.’
 38. Qur’«n, 42:11.
 39. The reference is to the Quranic expression sunnat Allah
found in 33:62; 35:43; 40:84-85; 48:23,  etc.
 40. Cf. Lecture III, p. 83, where Allama Iqbal observes: ‘The
scientiﬁc observer of Nature is a kind of mystic  seeker in the
act of prayer.’

41. McTaggart’s argument referred to here was advanced by
him in his article; ‘The Unreality of  Time’ in Mind (N.S.),
XVII/68 (October 1908), 457-74, reproduced later in Nature
of Existence, II, 9-31, as well as in the posthumous
Philosophical Studies, pp. 110-31. McTaggart has been
called ‘an outstanding giant  in the discussion of the reality
or unreality of time’  and his aforesaid article has been most
discussed in recent philosophical literature on Time. Of
articles in defence of McTaggart’s position, mention may be
made of Michael Dummett: ‘A Defence of McTaggart’s Proof
of the Unreality of Time’ in Philosophical Review, XIX (1960),
497-504. But he was criticised by C.D. Borad, the greatest
expositor of his philosophy (cf. his commentary:
Examination of McTaggart’s Philosophy, Vol. I, 1933, and Vol.
II in two parts, 1938), in Scientiﬁc Thought, to  which Allama
Iqbal has referred in the present discussion, as well as in his
valuable article: ‘Time’ in Encyclopaedia of Religion and
Ethics, XII, 339a; and earlier than Broad by Reyburn in his
article ‘Idealism and the Reality of Time’ in Mind (Oct.1913),
pp. 493-508 which has been brieﬂy summarized by J.
Alexander Gunn in Problem of Time: A Historical and Critical
Study, pp. 345-47.

42. Cf. C.D. Broad, Scientiﬁc Thought, p. 79.
 43. This is much like Broad’s admitting at the conclusion of
his examination of McTaggart’s argument that time ‘is  the
hardest knot in the whole of Philosophy’, ibid., p. 84.

96
 44. The Confessions of St. Augustine, xi, 17; cf. O. Spengler,
The Decline of the West, I, 140, where Augustine’s
observation is quoted in connection with ‘destiny’.
 45. Reference is to the Quranic verse 23:80 quoted on p. 37
above.
 46. Cf. M. Afdal Sarkhwush, Kalim«t al-Shu‘ar«‘, p. 77, where
this verse is given as under:
 47. Cf. Kit«b al-FiÄal, II,158; also 1. Goldziher, The Z«hirâs,
pp. 113 f.
 48. Qur’«Än, 50:38.
 49. Ibid., 2:255.

50. Goethe, Alterswerke (Hamburg edition), I, 367, quoted
by Spengler, op. cit., on ﬂy-leaf with translation  on p. 
140. For locating this passage in Goethe’s Alterswerke, I am
greatly indebted to  Professor Dr Annemarie Schimmel.

51. Reference here is to the Prophet’s last words: ‘ al-sal«tu
al-sal«tu wa m«malakat aim«nukum’ (meaning:  be mindful
of your prayers and be kind to persons subject to your
authority) reported  through three diﬀerent  chains of
transmitters in  AÁmad b. Àanbal’s Musnad: VI, 290, 311 and
321.

The Conception   of  God and  the  Meaning   of Prayer 
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal

We have seen that the judgement based upon religious
experience fully satisﬁes the intellectual  test. The more
important regions of experience, examined with  an eye on a
synthetic view, reveal, as the ultimate  ground of all
experience, a rationally directed creative  will which we have
found reasons to describe as an ego. In order to emphasize
the individuality  of the Ultimate Ego the Qur’«n gives Him
the proper name of Allah, and further  deﬁnes Him as
follows:

97
‘Say: Allah is One: 
All things depend on Him;
He begetteth not, and He is not begotten; And there is none
like unto Him’ (112:1-4).

But it is hard to understand what exactly  is an individual. As
Bergson has taught us in his Creative Evolution, individuality
is a matter of degrees and is not fully realized even in the
case of the apparently closed oﬀ unity of the  human being.1
‘In particular, it may  be said of individuality’,  says Bergson:

‘that while the tendency  to individuate is everywhere
present in the organized world, it is everywhere opposed by
the tendency towards reproduction. For the individuality  to
be perfect, it would be necessary that no detached part  of
the organism could live separately. But then reproduction
would be impossible. For what is reproduction but the
building up of a new organism with a detached fragment  of
the old? Individuality, therefore, harbours its  own enemy at
home.’2

In the light of this passage it is clear that  the perfect
individual, closed oﬀ as an ego, peerless and unique, cannot
be conceived as harbouring its own enemy at home. It must
be conceived as superior to the antagonistic tendency of
reproduction. This characteristic of the perfect ego is one of
the most essential elements in the Quranic conception of
God; and the Qur’«n mentions it over and over again, not so
much with a view to attack  the current Christian conception
as to accentuate its own view of a perfect individual.3 It
may, however, be said that the history  of religious thought
discloses various ways of escape from an individualistic
conception of the Ultimate Reality which is conceived as
some vague, vast, and pervasive cosmic element,4 such as
light. This is the view that Farnell has taken in his Giﬀord
Lectures on the Attributes of God. I agree that the history of

98
religion reveals modes of thought that tend  towards
pantheism; but I venture to  think that in so far as the
Quranic identiﬁcation of God with light  is concerned Farnell’s
view is incorrect. The full text of the  verse of which he
quotes a portion only is as follows:

‘God is the light of the Heavens and of the earth. His light is
like a niche in which is a lamp - the encased in a glass, - the
glass, as it were, a star’5 (24:35).

No doubt, the opening sentence of the verse gives the
impression of an escape from an individualistic conception
of God. But when we follow the metaphor of light in the  rest
of the verse, it gives just the opposite impression. The
development of the metaphor is meant  rather to exclude
the suggestion of a formless cosmic element by centralizing
the light in a ﬂame which is further  individualized by its
encasement in a glass likened unto a well-deﬁned star.
Personally, I think the description of God as light, in the
revealed literature of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, must
now be interpreted diﬀerently. The teaching of modern
physics is that the velocity of light  cannot be exceeded and
is the same for all observers whatever their own system of
movement. Thus, in the world of change, light is the nearest
approach to the Absolute. The metaphor of light as applied
to God, therefore, must, in view of modern knowledge, be
taken to suggest the Absoluteness of God and not His
Omnipresence which easily lends itself to a pantheistic
interpretation.

There is, however, one question which will be raised in this
connexion. Does not individuality imply ﬁnitude?  If God is an
ego and as such an individual, how can we conceive Him as
inﬁnite? The answer to this question is that God cannot be
conceived as inﬁnite in the sense of spatial inﬁnity. In
matters of spiritual valuation  mere immensity counts for

99
nothing. Moreover, as we have seen before, temporal and
spatial inﬁnities are not  absolute. Modern science regards
Nature not as something static, situated  in an inﬁnite void,
but a structure of interrelated  events out of whose mutual
relations arise the concepts of space and time. And this is
only another way of saying that  space and time are
interpretations which thought  puts upon the creative
activity of the  Ultimate Ego. Space and time are possibilities
of the Ego, only partially realized in the  shape of our
mathematical space and time. Beyond Him and apart from
His creative activity, there  is neither time nor space to close
Him oﬀ in reference to other egos. The Ultimate Ego is,
therefore, neither inﬁnite  in the sense of spatial inﬁnity  nor
ﬁnite in the sense of the space-bound human ego whose
body closes him oﬀ in reference to other egos. The inﬁnity
of the Ultimate Ego consists in the inﬁnite  inner possibilities
of His creative activity of which  the universe, as known to
us, is only a partial expression. In one word God’s inﬁnity is
intensive, not extensive.6 It involves an inﬁnite  series, but is
not that series. 
The other important elements in  the Quranic conception of
God, from a purely intellectual point  of view, are
Creativeness, Knowledge, Omnipotence, and Eternity. I shall
deal with them serially.

Finite minds regard nature as a confronting ‘other’  existing
per se, which the mind knows but does not make. We are
thus apt to regard the act  of creation as a speciﬁc past
event, and the universe appears to us as a manufactured
article which has no organic relation to the  life of its maker,
and of which the maker is nothing more than  a mere
spectator. All the meaningless theological controversies
about the idea of creation arise from this  narrow vision of
the ﬁnite mind.7 Thus regarded the universe is a mere
accident in the life of God and might not  have been created.
The real question which we are called upon to answer is

100
this: Does the universe confront God as His ‘other’, with
space intervening between Him and it? The answer is that,
from the Divine point of view, there  is no creation in the
sense of a speciﬁc event having a ‘before’ and an ‘after’.
The universe cannot be regarded as an independent reality
standing in opposition to Him. This view of the matter  will
reduce both God and the world to two separate entities
confronting each other in the empty  receptacle of an inﬁnite
space. We have seen before that space, time, and matter
are interpretations which thought  puts on the free creative
energy of God.8 They are not independent realities existing
per se, but only intellectual modes of apprehending the  life
of God. The question of creation once arose among the
disciples of the well-known saint B«Yazâd of Bist«m. One of
the disciples very pointedly put  the common-sense view
saying: ‘There was a moment of time when God existed and
nothing else existed beside Him.’ The saint’s reply was
equally pointed. ‘It is just  the same now’, said he, ‘as it was
then.’ The world of matter, therefore,  is not a stuﬀ coeternal
with God, operated upon by Him from a distance as it were.
It is, in its real nature, one continuous act which thought
breaks up into a plurality of mutually  exclusive things.
Professor Eddington has thrown further light on this
important point, and I take  the liberty to quote  from his
book, Space, Time and Gravitation:

‘We have a world of point-events with their primary  interval-
relations. Out of these an unlimited number of  more
complicated relations and qualities can be built up
mathematically, describing various features  of the state of
the world. These exist in nature in the same sense as an
unlimited number of walks exist on an open moor. But the
existence is, as it were, latent unless some one gives a
signiﬁcance to the walk by following it;  and in the same way
the existence of any one of these qualities of the world only
acquires signiﬁcance above its fellows if a mind singles it

101
out for recognition. Mind ﬁlters out  matter from the
meaningless jumble of qualities, as the prism ﬁlters  out the
colours of the rainbow from the chaotic pulsations of white
light. Mind exalts the permanent and ignores the  transitory;
and it appears from the mathematical  study of relations that
the only way in which mind can achieve her object is by
picking out one particular quality  as the permanent
substance of the perceptual world, partitioning  a perceptual
time and space for it to be permanent  in, and, as a
necessary consequence of this Hobson’s choice, the laws of
gravitation and mechanics and geometry have to  be
obeyed. Is it too much to say that the mind’s  search for
permanence has created the world of physics?’9

The last sentence in this passage is one of the deepest
things in Professor Eddington’s book. The physicist has yet
to discover by his own methods that the passing show of the
apparently permanent world of physics which the mind  has
created in its search for permanence is rooted in something
more permanent, conceivable only as a self which alone
combines the opposite attributes of change and
permanence, and can thus be regarded as both constant
and variable. There is, however, one question which we
must answer before we proceed further. In what manner
does the creative activity of God proceed to the work of
creation? The most orthodox and still popular school of
Muslim theology, I mean the Ash‘arite, hold that the  creative
method of Divine energy is atomic; and they appear to  have
based their doctrine on the following verse of the  Qur’«n:

‘And no one thing is here, but with Us are its store-houses;
and We send it not down but in ﬁxed quantities’  (15:21).

The rise and growth of atomism in Islam - the ﬁrst important
indication of an intellectual  revolt against the Aristotelian
idea of a ﬁxed universe - forms one of the most interesting

102
chapters in the history of Muslim thought.  The views of the
school of BaÄrah were ﬁrst shaped by AbëH«shim10 (A.D.
933) and those of the school of Baghdad by that most exact
and daring theological thinker, AbëBakr B«qil«nâ11
(A.D.1013). Later in the beginning of the thirteenth  century
we ﬁnd a thoroughly systematic description  in a book called
the Guide of the Perplexed by Moses Maimonides– a Jewish
theologian who was educated in the Muslim universities of
Spain.12 A French translation of this book was made by
Munk in 1866, and recently Professor Macdonald of America
has given an excellent account of its contents in the Isis
from which Dr. Zwemer has reprinted it in The Moslem World
of January 1928.13 Professor Macdonald, however, has made
no attempt to discover the  psychological forces that
determined the growth of atomistic  kal«m in Islam. He
admits that there is nothing  like the atomism of Islam in
Greek thought, but, unwilling as he is to give any credit  for
original thought to Muslim thinkers,14 and ﬁnding a surface
resemblance between the Islamic theory and the views of a
certain sect of Buddhism, he jumps to the conclusion that
the origin of the theory  is due to Buddhistic inﬂuences on
the thought of Islam.15 Unfortunately, a full discussion of the
sources of this purely speculative theory is not possible in
this lecture. I propose only to give you some of its more
salient features, indicating at the  same time the lines on
which the work of reconstruction in the  light of modern
physics ought, in my opinion, to proceed.

According to the Ash‘arite school of thinkers, then, the world
is compounded of what they call jaw«hir– inﬁnitely small
parts or atoms which cannot be further divided.  Since the
creative activity of God is ceaseless the number of the
atoms cannot be ﬁnite. Fresh atoms are coming into being
every moment, and the universe is therefore constantly
growing. As the Qur’«n says: ‘God adds to His creation what

103
He wills.’16 The essence of the atom is independent of its
existence. This means that existence is a quality imposed
on the atom by God. Before receiving this quality the atom
lies dormant, as it were, in the creative energy  of God, and
its existence means nothing more than Divine energy
become visible. The atom in its essence, therefore, has no
magnitude; it has its position which does not involve  space.
It is by their aggregation that  atoms become extended and
generate space.17 Ibn Àazm, the critic of atomism, acutely
remarks that the language of the Qur’«n makes no
diﬀerence in the act of creation and the  thing created. What
we call a thing, then, is in its essential nature  an
aggregation of atomic acts. Of the concept of ‘atomic  act’,
however, it is diﬃcult  to form a mental picture.  Modern
physics too conceives as action the actual atom of a certain
physical quantity. But, as Professor Eddington has pointed
out, the precise formulation of the  Theory of Quanta of
action has not been possible so far; though it is vaguely
believed that the atomicity  of action is the general law and
that the appearance of electrons is in some way dependent
on it.18
Again we have seen that each atom occupies a position
which does not involve space. That being so, what is the
nature of motion which we cannot conceive except as the
atom’s passage through space? Since the Ash‘arite
regarded space as generated by the aggregation of atoms,
they could not explain movement as a body’s passage
through all the points of space intervening  between the
point of its start and destination.  Such an explanation must
necessarily assume the existence of void as an independent
reality. In order, therefore, to get over the  diﬃculty of empty
space, Naïï«m resorted to the notion of ñafrah or jump; and
imagined the moving body, not as passing through all the
discrete positions in space, but as jumping over the void
between one position and another. Thus, according to him, a

104
quick motion and a slow motion possess the same speed;
but the latter  has more points of rest.19 I confess I do not
quite understand this solution of the  diﬃculty. It may,
however, be pointed out that modern  atomism has found a
similar diﬃculty  and a similar solution has been suggested.
In view of the experiments relating  to Planck’s Theory of
Quanta, we cannot imagine the moving atom as
continuously traversing its path in  space. ‘One of the most
hopeful lines of explanation’, says Professor Whitehead in
his Science and the Modern World,

‘is to assume that an electron does not continuously
traverse its path in space. The alternative notion  as to its
mode of existence is that it appears at a series of discrete
positions in space which it occupies for successive durations
of time. It is as though an automobile, moving  at the
average rate of thirty  miles an hour along a road, did not
traverse the road continuously, but appeared successively
at the successive milestones’ remaining for two minutes  at
each milestone.’20

Another feature of this theory of creation  is the doctrine of
accident, on the perpetual creation of which depends the
continuity of the atom  as an existent. If God ceases to
create the accidents, the atom ceases to exist as an atom.21
The atom possesses inseparable positive or negative
qualities. These exist in opposed couples, as life and death,
motion and rest, and possess practically no duration. Two
propositions follow from this: (i) Nothing has a stable nature.
(ii) There is a single order of atoms, i.e. what we call the
soul is either a ﬁner kind of matter,  or only an accident.

I am inclined to think that  in view of the idea of continuous
creation which the Ash‘arite intended to  establish there is
an element of truth in  the ﬁrst proposition. I have said
before that in my opinion the  spirit of the Qur’«n is on the

105
whole anti-classical.22 I regard the Ash‘arite thought on this
point as a genuine eﬀort to develop on the basis of an
Ultimate Will or Energy a theory of creation which, with  all
its shortcomings, is far more true to the  spirit of the Qur’«n
than the Aristotelian idea of a ﬁxed universe.23 The duty of
the future theologians of Islam is to reconstruct  this purely
speculative theory, and to bring it  into closer contact with
modern science which appears to be moving in the same
direction.

The second proposition looks like pure materialism. It is my
belief that the Ash‘arite  view that the Nafs is an accident is
opposed to the real trend of their own theory  which makes
the continuous existence of the atom dependent on the
continuous creation of accidents in it. It is obvious that
motion is inconceivable without time.  And since time comes
from psychic life, the latter  is more fundamental than
motion. No psychic life, no time: no time, no motion.  Thus it
is really what the Ash‘arites call the accident which is
responsible for the continuity of the  atom as such. The atom
becomes or rather looks spatialized when it receives the
quality of existence. Regarded as a phase of Divine energy,
it is essentially spiritual. The Nafs is the pure act; the body
is only the act become visible and hence measurable. In fact
the Ash‘arite vaguely anticipated  the modern notion of
point-instant; but they  failed rightly  to see the nature of the
mutual relation between the  point and the instant. The
instant is the more fundamental  of the two; but the  point is
inseparable from the instant as being a necessary mode of
its manifestation. The point is not a thing,  it is only a sort of
looking at the instant. Rëmâ is far more true to  the spirit of
Islam than Ghaz«lâ when he says:24

Reality is, therefore, essentially spirit. But, of course, there
are degrees of spirit. In the history of Muslim thought  the
idea of degrees of Reality appears in the writings of

106
Shih«buddân Suhrawardâ Maqtël. In modern times we ﬁnd it
worked out on a much larger scale in Hegel and, more
recently, in the late Lord Haldane’s Reign of Relativity,
which he published shortly before his death.25 I have
conceived the Ultimate Reality as an Ego; and I must add
now that from the Ultimate  Ego only egos proceed. The
creative energy of the Ultimate Ego, in whom deed and
thought are identical, functions as ego-unities.  The world, in
all its details, from the mechanical movement  of what we
call the atom of matter  to the free movement  of thought in
the human ego, is the self-revelation of the ‘Great I am’.26
Every atom of Divine energy, however low in the scale of
existence, is an ego. But there are degrees in the expression
of egohood. Throughout the entire gamut of being runs the
gradually rising note of egohood until it  reaches its
perfection in man. That is why the Qur’«n declares the
Ultimate Ego to be nearer to man than his own neck-vein.27
Like pearls do we live and move and have our being in the
perpetual ﬂow of Divine life.

Thus a criticism, inspired by the best traditions of  Muslim
thought, tends to turn  the Ash‘arite scheme of atomism into
a spiritual pluralism, the details  of which will have to be
worked out by the future theologians of Islam. It  may,
however, be asked whether atomicity has a real seat in the
creative energy of God, or presents itself to us as such only
because of our ﬁnite mode of apprehension. From a purely
scientiﬁc point of view I cannot say what the  ﬁnal answer to
this question will be. From the psychological point of view
one thing appears to me to be certain. Only that  is, strictly
speaking, real which is directly conscious of its own reality.
The degree of reality varies with the degree of the feeling  of
egohood. The nature of the ego is such that, in spite of its
capacity to respond to other egos, it is self-centred and
possesses a private circuit of individuality excluding all egos

107
other than itself.28 In this alone consists its reality as an ego.
Man, therefore, in whom egohood has reached its relative
perfection, occupies a genuine place in the heart of Divine
creative energy, and thus possesses a much higher degree
of reality than things around him.  Of all the creations of God
he alone is capable of consciously participating in the
creative life of his Maker.29 Endowed with the power to
imagine a better world, and to mould  what is into what
ought to be, the ego in him, aspires, in the interests  of an
increasingly unique and comprehensive individuality, to
exploit all the various environments on which he may  be
called upon to operate during the course of an endless
career. But I would ask you to wait for a fuller treatment  of
this point till my  lecture on the Immortality  and Freedom of
the Ego. In the meantime, I want to say a few words about
the doctrine of atomic time  which I think is the weakest part
of the Ash‘arite theory of creation.  It is necessary to do so
for a reasonable view of the Divine attribute  of Eternity.

The problem of time has always drawn the attention of
Muslim thinkers and mystics. This seems to be due partly to
the fact that, according to  the Qur’«n, the alternation  of day
and night is one of the greatest signs of God, and partly to
the Prophet’s identiﬁcation of God with Dahr (time)  in a well-
known tradition referred to  before.30 Indeed, some of the
greatest Muslim Suﬁs believed in the mystic properties of
the word Dahr. According to MuÁyuddân Ibn al-‘Arabâ, Dahr
is one of the beautiful names of God, and R«zâ tells us in his
commentary on the Qur’«n that some of the  Muslim saints
had taught him to repeat the  word Dahr, Daihur, or Daihar.
The Ash‘arite theory of time is perhaps the ﬁrst  attempt in
the history of Muslim thought to  understand it
philosophically. Time, according to the Ash‘arite, is a
succession of individual ‘nows’. From this view it obviously
follows that between every two individual  ‘nows’ or

108
moments of time, there  is an unoccupied moment of time,
that is to say, a void of time.  The absurdity of this
conclusion is due to the fact that  they looked at the subject
of their inquiry  from a wholly objective point of  view. They
took no lesson from the history of Greek thought, which  had
adopted the same point of view and had reached no results.
In our own time Newton described time as ‘something which
in itself and from its  own nature ﬂows equally.’31 The
metaphor of stream implied  in this description suggests
serious objections to Newton’s equally objective view of
time. We cannot understand how a thing is aﬀected on its
immersion in this stream, and how it  diﬀers from things that
do not participate in  its ﬂow. Nor can we form any idea of
the beginning, the end, and the boundaries of  time if we try
to understand it on the  analogy of a stream. Moreover, if
ﬂow, movement, or ‘passage’ is the last  word as to the
nature of time, there  must be another time to  time the
movement of the ﬁrst  time, and another which times  the
second time, and so on to inﬁnity. Thus the notion of time  as
something wholly objective is beset with  diﬃculties. It must,
however, be admitted that  the practical Arab mind could not
regard time as something unreal like the Greeks. Nor can it
be denied that, even though we possess no sense-organ to
perceive time, it is a kind of  ﬂow and has, as such, a
genuine objective, that is to  say, atomic aspect. In fact, the
verdict of modern science is exactly the same as that of  the
Ash‘arite; for recent discoveries in physics regarding the
nature of time assume the discontinuity  of matter. The
following passage from Professor Rougier’s Philosophy and
New Physics is noteworthy in this connexion:

‘Contrary to the ancient  adage, natura non facit saltus, it
becomes apparent that the universe varies by sudden jumps
and not by imperceptible degrees. A physical system is
capable of only a ﬁnite number of distinct  states . . . . Since
between two diﬀerent  and immediately consecutive states

109
the world remains motionless, time is suspended, so that
time itself is discontinuous: there is an atom  of time.’32

The point, however, is that the constructive  endeavour of
the Ash‘arite, as of the moderns, was wholly lacking in
psychological analysis, and the result of this shortcoming
was that they altogether  failed to perceive the subjective
aspect of time. It is due to this failure  that in their  theory the
systems of material atoms and time-atoms lie  apart, with no
organic relation between them. It is clear that  if we look at
time from a purely objective  point of view serious diﬃculties
arise; for we cannot apply atomic time to  God and conceive
Him as a life in the making, as Professor Alexander appears
to have done in his Lectures on Space, Time, and Deity.33
Later Muslim theologians fully realized these diﬃculties.
Mull« Jal«luddân Daw«nâ in a passage of his Zaur«’, which
reminds the modern student of Professor Royce’s view of
time, tells us that if  we take time to be a kind of span which
makes possible the appearance of events as a moving
procession and conceive this span to be a unity, then we
cannot but describe it as an original state of Divine  activity,
encompassing all the succeeding states of that activity. But
the Mull« takes good care to add that a deeper insight into
the nature of succession reveals its relativity, so that  it
disappears in the case of God to Whom all events are
present in a single act of perception. The Suﬁ poet ‘Ir«qâ34
has a similar way of looking at the matter. He conceives
inﬁnite varieties of time,  relative to the  varying grades of
being, intervening between materiality  and pure spirituality.
The time of gross bodies which arises from the revolution of
the heavens is divisible into past, present, and future;  and
its nature is such that as long as one day does not pass
away the succeeding day does not come. The time of
immaterial beings is also serial in character, but its  passage
is such that a whole year in the time of  gross bodies is not

110
more than a day in the time of an immaterial  being. Rising
higher and higher in the scale of immaterial  beings we
reach Divine time - time which is absolutely free from  the
quality of passage, and consequently does not admit of
divisibility, sequence, and change. It is above eternity;  it has
neither beginning nor end. The eye of God sees all the
visibles, and His ear hears all the audibles in one indivisible
act of perception. The priority of God is not due to the
priority of time;  on the other hand, the priority  of time is due
to God’s priority.35 Thus Divine time is what the Qur’«n
describes as the ‘Mother of Books’36 in which the whole of
history, freed from the net  of causal sequence, is gathered
up in a single supereternal ‘now’. Of all the Muslim
theologians, however, it is Fakhruddân R«zâ who appears to
have given his most serious attention to the  problem of
time. In his "Eastern Discussions," R«zâ subjects to a
searching examination all the contemporary theories  of
time. He too is, in the main, objective in  his method and
ﬁnds himself unable to reach any deﬁnite conclusions. ‘Until
now,’ he says,

‘I have not been able to discover anything really  true with
regard to the nature of time;  and the main purpose of my
book is to explain what can possibly be said for or against
each theory without any spirit  of partisanship, which I
generally avoid, especially in connexion with the problem  of
time.’37

The above discussion makes it perfectly clear that a purely
objective point of view is only partially  helpful in our
understanding of the nature of time.  The right course is a
careful psychological analysis of our conscious experience
which alone reveals the true nature of time.  I suppose you
remember the distinction that  I drew in the two aspects of
the self, appreciative and eﬃcient.  The appreciative self
lives in pure duration, i.e. change without  succession. The

111
life of the self consists in its movement from  appreciation to
eﬃciency, from intuition  to intellect,  and atomic time is born
out of this movement. Thus the character of our  conscious
experience - our point of departure in all knowledge - gives
us a clue to the concept which reconciles the opposition of
permanence and change, of time regarded as an organic
whole or eternity, and time  regarded as atomic. If then we
accept the guidance of our conscious experience, and
conceive the life of the all-inclusive Ego on the analogy of
the ﬁnite ego, the time  of the Ultimate Ego is revealed as
change without succession, i.e. an organic whole which
appears atomic because of the creative movement of the
ego. This is what Mâr D«m«d and Mull«B«qir mean when
they say that time is born with  the act of creation by  which
the Ultimate Ego realizes and measures, so to speak, the
inﬁnite wealth of His own undetermined creative
possibilities. On the one hand, therefore, the ego lives in
eternity, by which term  I mean non-successional change; on
the other, it lives in serial time,  which I conceive as
organically related to eternity  in the sense that it is a
measure of nonsuccessional change. In this sense alone it is
possible to understand the Quranic verse: ‘To God belongs
the alternation of day and night.’38 But on this diﬃcult  side
of the problem I have said enough in my preceding lecture.
It is now time to pass on to the Divine attributes  of
Knowledge and Omnipotence.

The word ‘knowledge’, as applied to the ﬁnite ego, always
means discursive knowledge - a temporal process which
moves round a veritable ‘other’,  supposed to exist per se
and confronting the knowing ego. In this sense knowledge,
even if we extend it to the  point of omniscience, must
always remain relative to its confronting  ‘other’, and cannot,
therefore, be predicated of the Ultimate  Ego who, being all-
inclusive, cannot be conceived as having a perspective like
the ﬁnite ego. The universe, as we have seen before, is not

112
an ‘other’ existing per se in opposition  to God. It is only
when we look at the act of creation as a speciﬁc event in the
life-history of God that the universe appears as an
independent ‘other’. From the standpoint  of the all-inclusive
Ego there is no ‘other’. In Him thought and deed, the act of
knowing and the act of creating, are identical.  It may be
argued that the ego, whether ﬁnite  or inﬁnite,  is
inconceivable without a confronting non-ego, and if there  is
nothing outside the Ultimate  Ego, the Ultimate Ego cannot
be conceived as an ego. The answer to this argument is that
logical negations are of no use in forming a positive concept
which must be based on the character of Reality as revealed
in experience. Our criticism of experience reveals the
Ultimate Reality to be a rationally directed  life which, in view
of our experience of life, cannot be conceived except as an
organic whole, a something closely knit together and
possessing a central point of reference.39 This being the
character of life, the ultimate  life can be conceived only as
an ego. Knowledge, in the sense of discursive knowledge,
however inﬁnite, cannot, therefore,  be predicated of an ego
who knows, and, at the same time, forms the ground of the
object known. Unfortunately, language does not help us
here. We possess no word to express the kind of knowledge
which is also creative of its object. The alternative concept
of Divine knowledge is omniscience in the sense of a single
indivisible act of perception which makes God immediately
aware of the entire sweep of history, regarded as an order
of speciﬁc events, in an eternal ‘now’. This is how Jal«luddân
Daw«nâ, ‘Ir«qâ, and Professor Royce in our own times
conceived God’s knowledge.40 There is an element of truth
in this conception. But it suggests a closed universe, a ﬁxed
futurity, a predetermined,  unalterable order of speciﬁc
events which, like a superior fate, has once for all
determined the directions of God’s creative activity.  In fact,
Divine knowledge regarded as a kind of passive omniscience

113
is nothing more than the inert  void of pre-Einsteinian
physics, which confers a semblance of unity on things by
holding them together, a sort  of mirror passively reﬂecting
the details of an already ﬁnished structure  of things which
the ﬁnite consciousness reﬂects in fragments only. Divine
knowledge must be conceived as a living creative activity  to
which the objects that appear to exist  in their own right  are
organically related. By conceiving God’s knowledge as a
kind of reﬂecting mirror,  we no doubt save His fore-
knowledge of future events; but it  is obvious that we do so
at the expense of His freedom. The future certainly preexists
in the organic whole of God’s creative life, but it  pre-exists
as an open possibility, not as a ﬁxed order of events with
deﬁnite outlines. An illustration  will perhaps help us in
understanding what I mean. Suppose, as sometimes
happens in the history of human thought,  a fruitful idea with
a great inner wealth of applications emerges into the  light of
your consciousness. You are immediately aware of the idea
as a complex whole; but the intellectual  working out of its
numerous bearings is a matter of time. Intuitively  all the
possibilities of the idea are present in your mind. If a
speciﬁc possibility, as such, is not intellectually known to
you at a certain moment of time,  it is not because your
knowledge is defective, but because there is yet no
possibility to become known. The idea reveals the
possibilities of its application with advancing  experience,
and sometimes it takes more than one generation of
thinkers before these possibilities are exhausted. Nor is it
possible, on the view of Divine knowledge as a kind of
passive omniscience, to reach the idea of a creator. If
history is regarded merely as a gradually revealed photo of
a predetermined order of events, then there  is no room in it
for novelty and initiation.  Consequently, we can attach no
meaning to the word ‘creation’,  which has a meaning for us
only in view of our own capacity for original  action. The
truth is that  the whole theological controversy relating  to

114
predestination is due to pure speculation with no eye on the
spontaneity of life, which is a fact of actual  experience. No
doubt, the emergence of egos endowed with the power of
spontaneous and hence unforeseeable action is, in a sense,
a limitation on the freedom  of the all-inclusive Ego. But this
limitation is not externally  imposed. It is born out of His own
creative freedom whereby He has chosen ﬁnite egos to be
participators of His life, power, and freedom. But how, it
may be asked, is it possible to reconcile limitation with
Omnipotence? The word ‘limitation’ need not frighten  us.
The Qur’«n has no liking for abstract universals. It always
ﬁxes its gaze on the concrete which the theory of Relativity
has only recently taught modern philosophy to  see. All
activity, creational or otherwise,  is a kind of limitation
without which it is impossible to  conceive God as a concrete
operative Ego. Omnipotence, abstractly conceived, is
merely a blind, capricious power without limits.  The Qur’«n
has a clear and deﬁnite conception of Nature as a cosmos of
mutually related forces.41 It, therefore, views Divine
omnipotence as intimately related  to Divine wisdom, and
ﬁnds the inﬁnite power of God revealed, not in the  arbitrary
and the capricious, but in the recurrent,  the regular, and the
orderly. At the same time, the Qur’«n conceives God as
‘holding all goodness in His hands’.42 If, then, the rationally
directed Divine will is good, a very serious problem arises.
The course of evolution, as revealed by modern science,
involves almost universal suﬀering and wrongdoing. No
doubt, wrongdoing is conﬁned to man only. But the fact of
pain is almost universal, thought it  is equally true that men
can suﬀer and have suﬀered the most excruciating pain for
the sake of what they have believed to be good. Thus the
two facts of moral and physical evil stand out prominent  in
the life of Nature. Nor can the relativity  of evil and the
presence of forces that tend to transmute it  be a source of
consolation to us; for, in spite of all this relativity  and

115
transmutation, there is something  terribly positive about  it.
How is it, then, possible to reconcile the goodness and
omnipotence of God with the immense volume of evil in  His
creation? This painful problem is really the crux of Theism.
No modern writer has put it more accurately  than Naumann
in his Briefe Ü ber Religion. ‘We possess’, he says:

‘a knowledge of the world which teaches us a God of power
and strength, who sends out life and death as
simultaneously as shadow and light, and a revelation, a faith
as to salvation which declares the same God to be father.
The following of the world-God produces the morality of the
struggle for existence, and the service of the Father of Jesus
Christ produces the morality of compassion. And yet they
are not two gods, but one God. Somehow or other, their
arms intertwine. Only no mortal can say where and how this
occurs.’43

To the optimist Browning all is well with the world;44 to the
pessimist Schopenhauer the world is one perpetual winter
wherein a blind will expresses itself in an inﬁnite variety  of
living things which bemoan their emergence for  a moment
and then disappear for ever.45 The issue thus raised
between optimism and pessimism cannot be ﬁnally decided
at the present stage of our knowledge of the universe. Our
intellectual constitution  is such that we can take only a
piecemeal view of things. We cannot understand the full
import of the great cosmic forces which work havoc, and at
the same time sustain and amplify life.  The teaching of the
Qur’«n, which believes in the possibility of improvement  in
the behaviour of man and his control over natural  forces, is
neither optimism nor pessimism. It is meliorism,  which
recognizes a growing universe and is animated by the hope
of man’s eventual victory over  evil.

116
But the clue to a better  understanding of our diﬃculty  is
given in the legend relating  to what is called the Fall of Man.
In this legend the Qur’«n partly  retains the ancient symbols,
but the legend is materially  transformed with a view  to put
an entirely fresh meaning into it.  The Quranic method of
complete or partial transformation  of legends in order to
besoul them with new ideas, and thus to adapt them  to the
advancing spirit of time,  is an important point which  has
nearly always been overlooked both by Muslim and non-
Muslim students of Islam. The object of the Qur’«n in
dealing with these legends is seldom historical; it  nearly
always aims at giving them a universal moral  or
philosophical import. And it achieves this object by  omitting
the names of persons and localities which tend to limit  the
meaning of a legend by giving it  the colour of a speciﬁc
historical event, and also by deleting details  which appear
to belong to a diﬀerent  order of feeling. This is not an
uncommon method of dealing with  legends. It is common in
non-religious literature. An instance in point  is the legend of
Faust,46 to which the touch of Goethe’s genius has given a
wholly new meaning.

Turning to the legend of the Fall we ﬁnd it in a variety of
forms in the literatures  of the ancient world. It is, indeed,
impossible to demarcate the stages of its growth,  and to set
out clearly the various human motives  which must have
worked in its slow transformation. But conﬁning  ourselves to
the Semitic form of the myth,  it is highly probable that  it
arose out of the primitive  man’s desire to explain to himself
the inﬁnite misery  of his plight in an uncongenial
environment, which abounded in disease and death and
obstructed him on all sides in his endeavour to maintain
himself. Having no control over the forces of Nature, a
pessimistic view of life was perfectly natural  to him. Thus, in
an old Babylonian inscription, we ﬁnd the serpent  (phallic
symbol), the tree, and the woman oﬀering  an apple (symbol

117
of virginity) to  the man. The meaning of the myth is clear -
the fall of man from a supposed state of bliss was due to the
original sexual act of the human pair. The way in which the
Qur’«n handles this legend becomes clear when we
compare it with the narration  of the Book of Genesis.47 The
remarkable points of diﬀerence between the Quranic and
the Biblical narrations suggest unmistakably the purpose of
the Quranic narration.

1. The Qur’«n omits the serpent and the rib-story altogether.
The former omission is obviously meant to free the story
from its phallic setting and its  original suggestion of a
pessimistic view of life. The latter omission is meant to
suggest that the purpose of the Quranic narration is not
historical, as in the case of the Old Testament, which gives
us an account of the origin of the ﬁrst  human pair by way of
a prelude to the history of Israel. Indeed, in the verses which
deal with the origin of man as a living being,  the Qur’«n
uses the words Bashar or Ins«n, not ÿdam, which it reserves
for man in his capacity of God’s vicegerent on earth.48 The
purpose of the Qur’«n is further secured by the omission of
proper names mentioned in the Biblical narration - Adam
and Eve.49 The word Adam is retained and used more as a
concept than as the name of a concrete human individual.
This use of the word is not without authority  in the Qur’«n
itself. The following verse is clear on the point:

‘We created you; then fashioned you; then said We to the
angels, "prostrate yourself unto Adam" (7:11).

2. The Qur’«n splits up the legend into two distinct
episodes– the one relating to what it describes simply as
‘the tree’50 and the other relating to the  ‘tree of eternity’
and the ‘kingdom that  faileth not’.51 The ﬁrst episode is
mentioned in the 7th and the  second in the 20th Sërah of
the Qur’«n. According to the Qur’«n, Adam and his wife, led

118
astray by Satan whose function is to create doubts in the
minds of men, tasted the fruit  of both the trees,  whereas
according to the Old Testament man was driven out of the
Garden of Eden immediately after his ﬁrst act of
disobedience, and God placed, at the eastern side of the
garden, angels and a ﬂaming sword, turning on all sides, to
keep the way to the tree of life.52

3. The Old Testament curses the earth for Adam’s act of
disobedience;53 the Qur’«n declares the earth to be the
‘dwelling place’ of man and a ‘source of proﬁt’  to him54 for
the possession of which he ought to be grateful to God. ‘And
We have established you on the earth and given you therein
the supports of life. How little  do ye give thanks!’ (7:10).55
Nor is there any reason to suppose that the word Jannat
(Garden) as used here means the supersensual paradise
from which man is supposed to have fallen on this earth.
According to the Qur’«n, man is not a stranger on this earth.
‘And We have caused you to grow from the earth’, says the
Qur’«n.56 The Jannat, mentioned in the legend, cannot mean
the eternal abode of the righteous.  In the sense of the
eternal abode of the righteous, Jannat is described by the
Qur’«n to be the place ‘wherein the righteous  will pass to
one another the cup which shall engender no light
discourse, no motive to sin’.57 It is further described to be
the place ‘wherein no weariness shall reach the righteous,
nor forth from it  shall they be cast’.58 In the Jannat
mentioned in the legend, however, the  very ﬁrst event that
took place was man’s sin of disobedience followed by his
expulsion. In fact, the Qur’«n itself explains the  meaning of
the word as used in its own narration. In the second episode
of the legend the garden is described as a place ‘where
there is neither hunger, nor thirst,  neither heat nor
nakedness’.59 I am, therefore, inclined to think that the
Jannat in the Quranic narration is the conception of a

119
primitive state in  which man is practically unrelated to  his
environment and consequently does not feel the sting  of
human wants the birth of which alone marks the  beginning
of human culture.

Thus we see that the Quranic legend of the Fall has nothing
to do with the ﬁrst  appearance of man on this planet. Its
purpose is rather to indicate man’s rise from  a primitive
state of instinctive appetite  to the conscious possession of a
free self, capable of doubt and disobedience. The Fall does
not mean any moral depravity; it  is man’s transition from
simple consciousness to the ﬁrst ﬂash of self-consciousness,
a kind of waking from the dream of nature  with a throb of
personal causality in one’s own being. Nor does the Qur’«n
regard the earth as a torture-hall where an elementally
wicked humanity is imprisoned for an original act  of sin.
Man’s ﬁrst act of disobedience was also his ﬁrst act of free
choice; and that is why, according to the Quranic narration,
Adam’s ﬁrst transgression was forgiven.60 Now goodness is
not a matter of compulsion; it  is the self’s free surrender to
the moral ideal and arises out of a willing co-operation  of
free egos. A being whose movements are wholly determined
like a machine cannot produce goodness. Freedom is thus a
condition of goodness. But to permit the emergence of a
ﬁnite ego who has the power to choose, after considering
the relative values of several courses of action open to him,
is really to take a great risk; for the  freedom to choose good
involves also the freedom to choose what is the opposite of
good. That God has taken this risk shows His immense faith
in man; it is for man now to justify  this faith. Perhaps such a
risk alone makes it possible to test and develop the
potentialities of a being who was created of the ‘goodliest
fabric’ and then ‘brought  down to be the lowest of the
low’.61 As the Qur’«n says: ‘And for trial will We test you
with evil and with good’ (21:35).62 Good and evil, therefore,

120
though opposites, must fall within  the same whole. There is
no such thing as an isolated fact; for facts are systematic
wholes the elements of which must be understood by
mutual reference. Logical judgement separates the
elements of a fact only to reveal their  interdependence.

Further, it is the nature of the  self to maintain itself  as a self.
For this purpose it seeks knowledge, self-multiplication, and
power, or, in the words of the Qur’«n, ‘the  kingdom that
never faileth’. The ﬁrst  episode in the Quranic legend
relates to man’s desire for knowledge, the second to his
desire for self-multiplication and power. In connexion with
the ﬁrst episode it is necessary to point  out two things.
Firstly, the episode is mentioned immediately after  the
verses describing Adam’s superiority over the angels in
remembering and reproducing the names of things.63 The
purpose of these verses, as I have shown before, is to bring
out the conceptual character of human  knowledge.64
Secondly, Madame Blavatsky65 who possessed a remarkable
knowledge of ancient symbolism, tells us in her book, called
Secret Doctrine, that with the  ancients the tree was a
cryptic symbol for occult  knowledge. Adam was forbidden to
taste the fruit  of this tree obviously because his ﬁnitude as a
self, his sense-equipment, and his intellectual faculties
were, on the whole, attuned to a diﬀerent  type of
knowledge, i.e. the type of knowledge which necessitates
the toil of patient  observation and admits only of slow
accumulation. Satan, however, persuaded him to eat the
forbidden fruit of  occult knowledge and Adam yielded, not
because he was elementally wicked, but because being
‘hasty’ (‘ajël)66 by nature he sought a short cut to
knowledge. The only way to correct this tendency was to
place him in an environment which, however painful,  was
better suited to  the unfolding of his intellectual  faculties.
Thus Adam’s insertion into a painful physical environment

121
was not meant as a punishment; it was meant rather  to
defeat the object of Satan who, as an enemy of man,
diplomatically tried  to keep him ignorant of the joy  of
perpetual growth and expansion. But the life of a ﬁnite  ego
in an obstructing environment depends on the perpetual
expansion of knowledge based on actual experience. And
the experience of a ﬁnite ego to whom several possibilities
are open expands only by method of trial and error.
Therefore, error which may be described as a kind of
intellectual evil is an indispensable factor in the  building up
of experience.

The second episode of the Quranic legend is as follows:

‘But Satan whispered him (Adam): said he, O Adam! shall I
show thee the tree of Eternity and the Kingdom that  faileth
not? And they both ate thereof, and their  nakedness
appeared to them, and they began to sew of the leaves of
the garden to cover them, and Adam disobeyed his Lord,
and went astray. Afterwards his Lord chose him for Himself,
and was turned towards him, and guided him.’ (20:120-22).

The central idea here is to suggest life’s irresistible desire
for a lasting dominion, an inﬁnite  career as a concrete
individual. As a temporal being, fearing the termination  of
its career by death, the only course open to it is to  achieve a
kind of collective immortality  by selfmultiplication.  The
eating of the forbidden fruit  of the tree of eternity  is life’s
resort to sexdiﬀerentiation  by which it multiplies itself  with a
view to circumvent total  extinction. It is as if life  says to
death: ‘If you sweep away one generation of living things,  I
will produce another’. The Qur’«n rejects the phallic
symbolism of ancient art, but suggests the original  sexual
act by the birth of the  sense of shame disclosed in Adam’s
anxiety to cover the nakedness of his body. Now to live is to
possess a deﬁnite outline, a concrete individuality. It is in

122
the concrete individuality,  manifested in the countless
varieties of living forms that  the Ultimate Ego reveals the
inﬁnite wealth of His Being. Yet the emergence and
multiplication of individualities,  each ﬁxing its gaze on the
revelation of its own possibilities and seeking its own
dominion, inevitably brings in its  wake the awful struggle of
ages. ‘Descend ye as enemies of one another’, says the
Qur’«n.67 This mutual conﬂict of opposing individualities is
the world-pain which both illuminates  and darkens the
temporal career of life. In the case of man in whom
individuality deepens into personality,  opening up
possibilities of wrongdoing, the sense of the tragedy of life
becomes much more acute. But the acceptance of selfhood
as a form of life involves the acceptance of all the
imperfections that ﬂow from  the ﬁnitude of  selfhood. The
Qur’«n represents man as having accepted at his peril the
trust of personality which the  heavens, the earth, and the
mountains refused to bear:

‘Verily We proposed to the heavens and to the earth and to
the mountains to receive the "trust"  but they  refused the
burden and they feared to receive it. Man undertook to  bear
it, but hath proved unjust,  senseless!’ (33:72). 
Shall we, then, say no or yes to the trust of personality with
all its attendant ills? True manhood, according to the Qur’«n,
consists in ‘patience under ills and hardships’.68 At the
present stage of the evolution of selfhood, however, we
cannot understand the full import  of the discipline which the
driving power of pain brings. Perhaps it hardens the self
against a possible dissolution. But in asking the above
question we are passing the boundaries of pure thought.
This is the point where faith in the eventual  triumph of
goodness emerges as a religious doctrine. ‘God is equal to
His purpose, but most men know it not’ (12:21).

123
I have now explained to you how it is possible
philosophically to justify the  Islamic conception of God. But
as I have said before, religious ambition soars higher than
the ambition of philosophy.69 Religion is not satisﬁed with
mere conception; it seeks a more intimate knowledge of and
association with the object of its pursuit.  The agency
through which this association is achieved is the act of
worship or prayer ending in spiritual illumination.  The act of
worship, however, aﬀects diﬀerent varieties  of
consciousness diﬀerently. In the case of the prophetic
consciousness it is in the main creative, i.e. it tends to
create a fresh ethical world wherein the Prophet, so to
speak, applies the pragmatic test to his revelations.  I shall
further develop this point  in my lecture on the meaning of
Muslim Culture.70 In the case of the mystic consciousness it
is in the main cognitive. It is from  this cognitive point of
view that I will try  to discover the meaning of prayer. And
this point of view is perfectly  justiﬁable in view of the
ultimate motive  of prayer. I would draw your attention to  the
following passage from the great American psychologist,
Professor William James:

‘It seems to probable that in spite of  all that "science" may
do to the contrary, men will  continue to pray to the  end of
time, unless their mental nature  changes in a manner which
nothing we know should lead us to expect. The impulse to
pray is a necessary consequence of the fact that whilst the
innermost of the empirical selves of a man is a Self of the
social sort, it yet can ﬁnd its only  adequate Socius [its
"great companion"] in an ideal world.

‘. . . most men, either continually  or occasionally, carry a
reference to it in their breast.  The humblest outcast on this
earth can feel himself to be real and valid by means of this
higher recognition. And, on the other hand, for most of  us, a
world with no such inner refuge when the outer  social self

124
failed and dropped from us would be the abyss of horror. I
say "for most of us", because it is probable that individuals
diﬀer a good deal in the degree in which they  are haunted
by this sense of an ideal spectator. It is a much more
essential part of the consciousness of some men than of
others. Those who have the most of it are possibly the most
religious men. But I am sure that even those who say they
are altogether without it  deceive themselves, and really
have it in some degree.’71

125
Thus you will see that, psychologically speaking, prayer is
instinctive in its origin.  The act of prayer as aiming at
knowledge resembles reﬂection. Yet prayer at its highest is
much more than abstract reﬂection.  Like reﬂection it too is a
process of assimilation, but the assimilative process in the
case of prayer draws itself closely together and thereby
acquires a power unknown to pure thought. In thought the
mind observes and follows the working of Reality; in the act
of prayer it gives up its career as a seeker of slow-footed
universality and rises higher than thought  to capture Reality
itself with a view to become a conscious participator in  its
life. There is nothing mystical about it.  Prayer as a means of
spiritual illumination  is a normal vital act by which the  little
island of our personality suddenly discovers its situation in a
larger whole of life. Do not think I am talking  of auto-
suggestion. Auto-suggestion has nothing to do with the
opening up of the sources of life that lie in the  depths of the
human ego. Unlike spiritual illumination which brings fresh
power by shaping human personality, it leaves no
permanent life-eﬀects behind. Nor am I speaking of some
occult and special way of knowledge. All that I mean is to ﬁx
your attention on a real human experience which has a
history behind it and a future  before it. Mysticism has, no
doubt, revealed fresh regions of the self by making a special
study of this experience. Its literature  is illuminating; yet  its
set phraseology shaped by the thought-forms of a worn-out
metaphysics has rather a deadening eﬀect on the modern
mind. The quest after a nameless nothing, as disclosed in
Neo-Platonic mysticism - be it Christian or Muslim - cannot
satisfy the modern mind which, with  its habits of concrete
thinking, demands a concrete living experience of God. And
the history of the race shows that the  attitude of the  mind
embodied in the act of worship is a condition for such an
experience. In fact, prayer must be regarded as a necessary
complement to the intellectual  activity  of the observer of

126
Nature. The scientiﬁc observation of Nature keeps us in
close contact with the behaviour of Reality, and thus
sharpens our inner perception for a deeper vision of it. I
cannot help quoting here a beautiful passage from the
mystic poet Rëmâ in which he describes the mystic quest
after Reality:72

The Sëﬁ’s book is not composed of ink and letters: it is not
but a heart white as snow. The scholar’s possession is pen-
marks. What is the Sëﬁ’s possession? - foot-marks. The Sëﬁ
stalks the game like a hunter: he sees the musk-deer’s track
and follows the footprints. 
For some while the track of the deer is the proper clue for
him, but afterwards it is the  muskgland of the deer that is
his guide. 
To go one stage guided by the scent of the musk-gland is
better than a hundred stages of following the  track and
roaming about.73

The truth is that all search for knowledge is essentially a
form of prayer. The scientiﬁc observer of Nature is a kind of
mystic seeker in the act of prayer. Although at present he
follows only the footprints of the  musk-deer, and thus
modestly limits the method  of his quest, his thirst for
knowledge is eventually sure to lead him to the  point where
the scent of the musk-gland is a better guide than  the
footprints of the deer. This alone will add to his power over
Nature and give him that vision of the  total-inﬁnite which
philosophy seeks but cannot ﬁnd. Vision without power does
bring moral elevation but cannot  give a lasting culture.
Power without vision tends to become destructive and
inhuman. Both must combine for the spiritual  expansion of
humanity.

The real object of prayer, however, is better achieved when
the act of prayer becomes congregational. The spirit of all

127
true prayer is social. Even the hermit abandons the society
of men in the hope of ﬁnding, in a solitary  abode, the
fellowship of God. A congregation is an association of men
who, animated by the same aspiration, concentrate
themselves on a single object and open up their inner selves
to the working of a single impulse. It is a psychological truth
that association multiplies the normal  man’s power of
perception, deepens his emotion, and dynamizes his will to
a degree unknown to him in the privacy of his individuality.
Indeed, regarded as a psychological phenomenon, prayer is
still a mystery; for psychology has not yet  discovered the
laws relating to the enhancement of human sensibility  in a
state of association. With Islam, however, this socialization
of spiritual illumination  through associative prayer is a
special point of interest. As we pass from the daily
congregational prayer to the annual ceremony round the
central mosque of Mecca, you can easily see how the
Islamic institution of worship gradually  enlarges the sphere
of human association. 
Prayer, then, whether individual or associative, is an
expression of man’s inner yearning for a response in the
awful silence of the universe. It is a unique process of
discovery whereby the searching ego aﬃrms itself in the
very moment of self-negation, and thus discovers its own
worth and justiﬁcation as a dynamic factor  in the life of the
universe. True to the psychology of mental attitude in
prayer, the form of worship in Islam symbolizes both
aﬃrmation and negation. Yet, in view of the fact borne out
by the experience of the race that prayer,  as an inner act,
has found expression in a variety of forms, the Qur’«n says:

‘To every people have We appointed ways of worship which
they observe. Therefore let them not dispute this  matter
with thee, but bid them  to thy Lord for thou art  on the right
way: but if they debate with  thee, then say: God best
knoweth what ye do! He will judge between

128
you on the Day of Resurrection, as to the matters wherein
ye diﬀer’ (22:67-69).
 The form of prayer ought not to become a matter of
dispute.74 Which side you turn your face is certainly not
essential to the spirit of prayer. The Qur’«n is perfectly clear
on this point:
 ‘The East and West is God’s: therefore whichever way ye
turn, there is the face of God’ (2:115).

‘There is no piety in turning your faces towards the East or
the West, but he is pious who believeth in God, and the Last
Day, and the angels, and the scriptures, and the prophets;
who for the love of God disburseth his wealth to his kindred,
and to the orphans, and the needy, and the wayfarer, and
those who ask, and for ransoming; who observeth prayer,
and payeth the legal alms, and who is of those who are
faithful to their  engagements when they have engaged in
them; and patient under ills  and hardships, in time of
trouble: those are they who are just, and those are they who
fear the Lord’ (2:177).

Yet we cannot ignore the important consideration that the
posture of the body is a real factor in determining  the
attitude of the  mind. The choice of one particular direction
in Islamic worship is meant to secure the unity of feeling  in
the congregation, and its form in general creates and fosters
the sense of social equality inasmuch as it tends to destroy
the feeling of rank or race superiority  in the worshippers.
What a tremendous spiritual revolution will  take place,
practically in no time, if  the proud aristocratic Brahmin of
South India is daily made to stand shoulder to shoulder with
the untouchable! From the unity of the  all-inclusive Ego who
creates and sustains all egos follows the essential unity of
all mankind.75 The division of mankind into races, nations,
and tribes, according to the Qur’«n, is for purposes of
identiﬁcation only.76 The Islamic form of association in

129
prayer, therefore, besides its cognitive value,  is further
indicative of the aspiration  to realize this essential unity of
mankind as a fact in life by demolishing all  barriers which
stand between man and man.

Lecture  III  Notes:  THE CONCEPTION OF GOD AND THE
MEANING OF PRAYER
 1. Cf. Creative Evolution, p. 13; also pp. 45-46.
 2. Ibid., p. 14.
 3. See Qur’«n, for example, 2:163, 4:171, 5:73, 6:19, 13:16,
14:48, 21:108, 39:4 and 40:16, on the Unity  of Allah and
4:171, 6:101, 10:68, 17:111, 19:88-92 emphatically  denying
the Christian doctrine of His sonship.
 4. Cf. L.R. Farnell, The Attributes of God, p. 56.
 5. The full translation here is ‘a glistening star’, required by
the nass of the Qur’«n, ‘Kaukab-un îurrây-ën’.
 6. On this ﬁne distinction of God’s inﬁnity being intensive
and not extensive, see further Lecture IV, p. 94.

7. For the long-drawn controversy on the issue of the
creation of the universe, see, for instance, Ghazz«lâ, Tah«fut
al-Fal«sifah, English translation by S.A. Kam«lâ: Incoherence
of the Philosophers, pp. 13-53, and Ibn Rushd, Tah«fut al-
Tah«fut, English translation by Simon van den Bergh: The
Incoherence of the Incoherence, pp. 1-69; cf. also G.F.
Hourani, ‘Alghaz«lâ and the Philosophers on the Origin of
the World’, The Muslim World, XLVII/2(1958), 183-91, 308-14
and M. Saeed Sheikh, ‘Al-Ghaz«lâ: Metaphysics’, A History of
Muslim Philosophy ed. M.M. Sharif, I, 598-608.

8. Cf. Lecture II, 28, 49.
 9. A.S. Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation, pp. 197-98
(italics by Allama Iqbal).

10. For AbuHashim’s theory of atomism cf. T.J. de Boer,
‘Atomic Theory (Muhammadan)’, Encyclopaedia of Religion

130
and Ethics, II, 202-03. De Boer’s account is based on Abë
Rashâd Sa‘âd’s Kit«b al-Mas«’il Fi’l-Khil«f, ed. and trans. into
German by Arthur Biram (Leyden,1902).

11. Cf. Ibn Khaldën, Muqaddimah, English translation by F.
Rosenthal, III, 50-51, where B«qill«nâ is said to have
introduced the conceptions of atom(al-jawhar al-fard),
vacuum and accidents into the Ash‘artie Kal«m. R. J.
McCarthy, who has edited and also translated some of
B«qill«nâ’s texts, however, considers this to be
unwarranted; see his article ‘al-B«kâll«nâ’s’ in the
Encyclopaedia of Islam (New edition), I, 958-59. From the
account of Muslim atomism given in al-Ash‘arâ’s Maq«l«t al-
Isl«miyân, this much has, however, to be conceded that
atomism was keenly discussed by the Muslim scholastic
theologians long before B«qill«nâ.

12. For the life and works of Maimonides and his relationship
with Muslim philosophy, cf. S. Pines, The Guide of the
Perpelexed (New English translation, Chicago University
Press, 1963), ‘Introduction’ by the translator  and an
‘Introductory Essay’ by L. Strauss; cf. also Sarton,
Introduction to the History of ScienceIntroduction to  the
History of Science 77.

13. D.B. Macdonald, ‘Continuous Re-creation and Atomic
Time in Moslem Scholastic Theology’, The Moslem World,
XVII/i (1928), 6-28; reprinted from Isis, IX (1927), 326-44.
This article is focussed on Maimonides’ well-known ‘Twelve
Propositions of the Katam’.

14. Macdonald, ‘Continuous Re-creation and Atomic Time . .
.’ in op. cit., p.’24.
 15. Ibid., pp. 25-28. See also The Religious Attitude and Life
in Islam, p. 320, where Macdonald traces the pantheistic

131
developments in later suﬁ schools to Buddhistic and
Vedantic inﬂuences.
 16. Qur’«n, 35:1.
 17. Cf. de Boer, ‘Atomic Theory (Muhammadan)’, in op. cit.,
II, 203.
 18. Cf. Eddington, op. cit., p. 200.

19. For an account of Naïï«m’s notion of al-tafrah or jump,
see Ash‘arâ, Maq«l«t al-Isl«miyân, II, 18; Ibn Àazm, Kit«b al-
FiÄal, V, 64-65, and Shahrast«nâ, Kit«b al-Milal wa’l-NiÁal,
pp. 38-39; cf. also Isr«’ânâ, AlTabsâr, p. 68, Majid Fakhry,
Islamic Occasionalism, p. 39, and H.A. Wolfson: The
Philosophy of the Kal«m, pp. 514-17.

20. A.N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World, p. 49.
 21. A view, among others held by B«qill«nâ who bases it on
the Quranic verses 8:67 and 46:24 which speak of the
transient nature of the  things of this world. Cf. Kit«b al-
Tamhâd, p. 18.

22. Lecture I, p. 3; see also Lecture V, p. 102, note 21. 
23. For Ash‘arites’ theory of the perpetual re-creation  of the
universe basing it on the Absolute Power and Will of God, cf.
Majid Fakhry, Islamic Occasionalism, pp. 15, 117 ﬀ. and M.
Saeed Sheikh, ‘Al-Ghaz«lâ; Metaphysics’, in op. cit., I, 603-
08.

24. In R.A. Nicholson’s edition of the Mathnawâ this verse
(i.1812) reads as under:
 Wine became intoxicated with us, not we with it;
 The body came into being from us, not we from it.

25. Viscount Richard Burdon Haldane, the elder brother of
John Scott Haldane, from whose Symposium Paper Allama
Iqbal has quoted at length in Lecture II, p. 35, was a leading
neo-Hegelian British philosopher and a distinguished

132
statesman who died on 19 August 1928. Allama’s using the
expression ‘the late Lord Haldane’ is indicative of the
possible time of his writing the  present Lecture which
together with the  ﬁrst two Lectures was delivered in Madras
(5-8 Jan. 1929). The ‘idea of degrees of reality and
knowledge’, is very vigorously expounded by Haldane in The
Reign of Relativity (1921) as also in his earlier two-volume
Giﬀord Lectures: The Pathway to Reality (1903-04) in which
he also expounded the Principle of Relativity on purely
philosophical grounds even before the publication of
Einstein’s theory; cf. Rudolf Metz, A Hundred Years of British
Philosophy, p. 315.

26. This is a reference to the Qur’an, 20:14.
 27. Ibid., 50:16.
 28. For further elucidation of the privacy of the ego, see
Lecture IV, pp. 79-80.
 29. Cf. p. 64 where Iqbal says that God ‘out of His own
creative freedom . . . . has chosen ﬁnite egos to be
participators of His life, power, and freedom’.
 30. The tradition: ‘Do not vilify time, for time  is God’
referred to in Lecture I, p. 8.
 31. Cf. The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy,
Vol. I, Deﬁnition viii, Scholium i.

32. Cf. Louis Rougier, Philosophy and the New Physics (An
Essay on the Relativity Theory and the Theory of Quanta), p.
143. The work belongs to the earlier phase of Rougier’s
philosophical output, a phase in which he was seized by the
new discoveries of physicists and mathematicians such as
Henry Poincare (celestial mechanics and new geometry),
Max Planck (quantium theory) Nicolas L. Carnot
(thermodynamics), Madame Curie (radium and its
compounds) and Einstein (principle of relativity).  This was
followed by his critical study of  theories of knowledge:
rationalism and scholasticism, ending in his thesis of the

133
diversity of ‘metaphysical  temperaments’ and the  ‘inﬁnite
plasticity’ of  the human mind whereby it takes delight  in
‘quite varied forms of  intelligibility’.  To the ﬁnal phase of
Rougier’s philosophical productivity belongs La
Metaphysique et le langage (1960) in which he elaborated
the conception of plurality  of language in philosophical
discourse. Rougier also wrote on history of ideas (scientiﬁc,
philosophical, religious) and on contemporary political  and
economical problems - his Les Mystiques politiques et leurs
incidences internationales (1935) and Les Mystiques
economiques (1949) are noteworthy.

It is to be noted that  both the name ‘Louis Rougier’ and the
title of his book Philosophy and the New Physics cited in the
passage quoted by Allama Iqbal are given puzzlingly
incorrectly in the previous editions  of Reconstruction
including the one by Oxford University Press (London, 1934);
and these were not noticed even by Madame Eva
Meyerovitch in her French translation: Reconstruire la
pensee religieuse de l’Islam (Paris, 1955, p. 83). It would
have been well-nigh impossible for me to ﬁnd out  the
author’s name and title  of the book correctly had I not
received the very kindly help of  the Dutch scholar the
Reverend Dr. Jan Slomp and Mlle Mauricette Levasseur of
Bibliothé que Nationale, Paris, who also supplied me with
many useful particulars about the  life and works of Rougier.
The last thing that I heard was that  this French philosopher
who taught in various universities  including the ones in
Cairo and New York and who participated in various
Congresses and was the President of the Paris International
Congress of Scientiﬁc Philosophy in 1935, passed away on
14 October 1982 at the age of ninety-three. 
33. Cf. Space, Time and Deity, II, 396-98; also Allama Iqbal’s
letter dated 24 January 1921 addressed to R.A. Nicholson
(Letters of Iqbal, ed. B.A. Dar, pp. 141-42) where, while
disagreeing with Alexander’s view of God, he observes: ‘I

134
believe there is a Divine tendency in the universe,  but this
tendency will eventually  ﬁnd its complete expression in a
higher man, not in a God subject to Time, as Alexander
implies in his discussion of the subject.’

34. The Suﬁ poet named here as well as in Lectures V and
VII as (Fakhr al-Dân) ‘Ir«qâ, we are told, is really ‘Ain al-
Quî«t Abu’l-Mu‘«lâ ‘Abdullah b. Muhammad b. ‘Alâ b. al-
Àasan b. ‘Alâ al-Miy«njâ al-Hamad«nâ whose tractate on
space and time: Gh«yat al-Imk«n ﬁ Dir«yat al-Mak«n (54
pp.) has been edited by Rahim Farmanish (Tehran, 1338
S/1959); cf. English translation of the tractate by  A.H.
Kamali, section captioned: ‘Observations’, pp. i-v; also B.A.
Dar, ‘Iqbal aur Mas‘alah-i Zam«n-o-Mak«n’ in Fikr-i Iqbal ke
Munawwar Goshay, ed. Salim Akhtar, pp. 149-51. Nadhr
S«birâ, however, strongly pleads that the real author  of the
tractate was Shaikh T«j al-Dân Mahmëd b. Khud«-d«d
Ashnawâ, as also hinted by Allama Iqbal in his Presidential
Address delivered at the Fifth Indian Oriental Conference
(1928) (Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal,’p. 137).
Cf. Shaikh Mahmëd Ashnawâ’s tractate: Gh«yat al Imk«n ﬁ
Ma‘rifat al-Zam«n wa’l-Mak«n (42 pp.) edited by Nadhr
S«birâ, ‘Introduction’ embodying the  editor’s research about
the MSS of the tractate and the available data of its  author;
also H«jâKhalâfah, Kashf al-Zunën, II, 1190, and A. Monzavi,
A Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts, vol. II, Part I, MSS 7556-
72.

Cf. also Maul«n«Imti«z ‘AlâKh«n ‘Arshâ, ‘Zam«n-o-Mak«n kâ
Bahth ke Muta‘allaq ‘All«mah Iqb«l k« aik Ma’«khidh:
‘Ir«qâya Ashnawâ’, Maq«l«t: Iqb«l ‘ÿlamâ K«ngras (Iqbal
Centenary Papers Presented at the International Congress
on Allama Mohammad Iqbal: 2-8 December 1977), IV, 1-10
wherein Maul«n«’ Arshâ traces a new MS of the tractate in
the Raza Library, Rampur, and suggests the possibility of its
being the one used by Allama Iqbal in these Lectures as well

135
as in his Address: ‘A Plea for Deeper Study of Muslim
Scientists’.

It may be added that there  remains now no doubt as to the
particular MS of this unique Suﬁ tractate on ‘Space and
Time’ used by Allama Iqbal, for fortunately it  is well
preserved in the Allama Iqbal Museum, Lahore (inaugurated
by the President of Pakistan on 26 September 1984). The
MS, according to a note in Allama’s own hand dated 21
October 1935, was transcribed for him by the celebrated
religious scholar Sayyid Anwar Sh«h K«shmârâ Cf. Dr Ahmad
Nabi Khan, Relics of Allama Iqbal (Catalogue), p. 12.

For purposes of present annotation we have referred to
Rahi`m Farmanish’s edition of Hamad«nâ’s Gh«yat alImk«n
ﬁ Dir«yat al-Mak«n (Tehran, 1338/1959) and to A.H. Kamali’s
English translation of it (Karachi, 1971) where needed. This
translation, however, is to be used with caution.

35. Cf. ‘Ain al-Quz«t Hamad«nâ, op. cit., p. 51; English
translation, p. 36.
 36. The Quranic expression umm al-kit«b occurs in 3:7,
13:39 and 43:4.
 37. Cf. al-Mab«hith al-Mashriqâgah, I, 647; the Arabic text of
the passage quoted in English is as under:
 38. Reference here is in particular to the Qur’«n 23:80
quoted in Lecture II, p.’37.

39. Cf. Lecture II, p. 49, where, summing up his
philosophical ‘criticism’  of experience, Allama Iqbal says:
‘facts of experience justify  the inference that the ultimate
nature of Reality is spiritual and must be conceived as an
ego.’

40. Cf. ‘Ain al-Quz«t Hamad«nâ, op. cit., p. 50; English
translation, p. 36. For Royce’s view of knowledge of all

136
things as a whole at once (totum simul), see his World and
the Individual, II, 141.

41. About the cosmic harmony and unity of Nature the
Qur’«n says: ‘Thou seest no incongruity in the creation of
the Beneﬁcent. Then look again. Canst thou see any
disorder? Then turn thy eye again and again - thy look will
return to thee concused while it is fatigued’  (67:3-4).

42. Qur’«n, 3:26 and 73: see also 57:29. 
43. Cf. Joseph Friedrich Naumann, Briefe ü ber Religion, p.
68; also Lecture VI, note 38. The German text of the
passage quoted in English is as under:

"Wir haben eine Welterkenntnis, die uns einen Gott der
Macht und Starke lehrt, der Tod und Leben wie Schatten und
Licht gleichzeitig versendet, und eine Oﬀenbarung, einen
Heilsglauben, der von demselben Gott sagt, dass er Vater
sei. Die Nachfolge des Weltgottes ergibt die Sittlichkeit des
Kampfes ums Dasein, und der Dienst des Vaters Jesu Christi
ergibt die Sittlichkeit  der Barmherzigkeit. Es sind aber nicht
zwei Gotter, sondern einer. Irgendwie greifen ihre Arme
ineinander. Nur kann kein Sterblicher sagen, wo und wie das
geschieht."

44. Reference is to Browning’s famous lines in ‘Pippa
Passes’:
 God is in the heaven - All is right with the world.’
 45. Cf. Schopenhauer, World as Will and Idea, trans. R.B.
Haldane and J. Kemp, Book iv, section 57.
 46. For the origin and historical growth of the legend of
Faust before Goethe’s masterly work on it, cf. Mary Beare’s
article ‘Faust’ in Cassell’s Encyclopaedia of Literature, 1,
217-19.
 47. Cf. Genesis, chapter iii.
 

137
48. Strictly speaking, the word Adam for man in his capacity
of God’s vicegerent on earth has been used in the Qur’«n
only in 2:30-31.
 49. Cf. Genesis, iii, 20.
 50. Qur’«n, 7:19.
 51. Ibid., 20:120.
 52. Cf. Genesis, iii, 24.
 53. Ibid., iii,17.
 54. Qur’«n, 2:36 and 7:24.
 55. Cf. also verses 15:19-20.
 56. Ibid., 71:17.
 57. Ibid., 52:23.
 58. Ibid., 15:48.
 59. Ibid., 20:118-119.
 60. Ibid., 2:35-37; also 20:120-122.
 61. Ibid., 95:4-5.
 62. Cf. also verses 2:155 and 90:4.
 63. Ibid., 2:31-34.

64. Lecture I, pp. 10-11. 
65. Madame Helena Petrovna Blavatsky (1831-1891) is a
noted spiritualist and theosophist  of Russian birth, who in
collaboration with Col. H.S. Olcott and W.A. Judge founded
Theosophical Society in New York in November 
1873. Later she transferred her activities  to India where in
1879 she established the oﬃce of the Society in Bombay
and in 1883 in Adyar near Madras with the following three
objects: (i) to form a nucleus of the  universal brotherhood of
humanity; (ii) to  promote the study of comparative  religion,
philosophy and science, and (iii) to investigate the
unexplained laws of nature and powers latent in man. The
Secret Doctrine (1888) deals, broadly speaking, with
‘Cosmogenesis’ and ‘Anthropogenesis’ in a ponderous way;
though largely based on Vedantic thought the ‘secret
doctrine’ is claimed to carry  in it the essence of all religions.

138
For the mention of tree as ‘a cryptic symbol  for occult
knowledge’ in The Secret Doctrine, cf. I, 187: ‘The Symbol
for Sacred and Secret knowledge in antiquity was
universally a Tree, by which a scripture or a Record was also
meant’; III, 384: ‘Ormzad . . . is also the creator of the  Tree’
(of Occult and Spiritual Knowledge and Wisdom) from which
the mystic and the mysterious  Baresma is taken’, and IV,
159: ‘To the Eastern Occultist the Tree of Knowledge (leads)
to the light  of the eternal present Reality’.

It may be added that Allama Iqbal seems to have a little
more than a mere passing interest in the Theosophical
Society and its activities for, as reported  by Dr M. ‘Abdull«h
Chaghat«‘â, he, during his quite busy stay in Madras (5-8
Jan. 1929) in connection with the present Lectures, found
time to pay a visit  to the head oﬃce of the Society at  Adyar.
One may also note in Development of Metaphysics in Persia
(p. 10, note 2) reference to a small work Reincarnation by
the famous Annie Besant (President of the Theosophical
Society, 1907-1933, and the ﬁrst and the only  English
woman who served as President of the Indian National
Congress in 1917) and added to this are the two books
published by the Theosophical Society in Allama’s personal
library (cf. Descriptive Catalogue of Allama Iqbal’s Personal
Library, No. 81 and Relics of Allama Iqbal; Catalogue IV, 11).
All this, however, does not enable one to determine the
nature of Allama Iqbal’s interest in the  Theosophical Society.

66. Qur’«n, 17; 11; also 21:37. The tree which Adam was
forbidden to approach (2:35 and 7:19), according to  Allama
Iqbal’s remarkably profound and rare understanding of the
Qur’«n, is the tree of ‘occult knowledge’,  to which man in all
ages has been tempted to resort in unfruitful  haste. This, in
Allama’s view, is opposed to the inductive knowledge ‘which
is most characteristic of Islamic teachings’. He indeed, tells
us in Lecture V (p. 101) that ‘the birth  of Islam is the birth of

139
inductive intellect.’  True, this second kind of knowledge is so
toilsome and painfully slow: yet this  knowledge alone
unfolds man’s creative intellectual  faculties and makes him
the master of his environment  and thus God’s true
vicegerent on earth. If this is the  true approach to
knowledge, there is little  place in it for Mme Blavatsky’s
occult spiritualism or theosophism. Allama Iqbal was in fact
opposed to all kinds of occultism. In one of his dialogues, he
is reported to have said that ‘the  forbidden tree’  (shajr-i
mamnë‘ah) of the Qur’«n is no other than  the occultistic
taÄawwuf which prompts the patient  to seek some charm or
spell rather than take the  advice of a physician. The
taÄawwuf, he added, which urges us to close our eyes and
ears and instead to concentrate on the inner vision and
which teaches us to leave the arduous ways of conquering
Nature and instead take to some easier spiritual ways, has
done the greatest harm to science. [Cf. Dr Abu’l-Laith
Siddâqâ, Malfëz«t-i Iqb«l, pp. 138-39]. It must, however, be
added that Allama Iqbal does speak of a genuine or higher
kind of taÄawwuf which soars higher than all sciences and
all philosophies. In it the human ego so to say discovers
himself as an individual deeper than his conceptually
describable habitual selfhood. This happens in the ego’s
contact with the  Most Real which brings about in it a kind of
‘biological transformation’  the description of which
surpasses all ordinary language and all usual categories of
thought. ‘This experience can embody itself only  in a world-
making or world-shaking act, and in this form  alone’, we are
told, ‘can this timeless experience . . . make itself  visible to
the eye of history’ (Lecture VII, p. 145).

67. Qur’«n, 2:36; 7:24; 20:123.
 68. Ibid., 2:177; 3:200.
 69. Lecture II, p. 58.
 70. Lecture V, pp. 119ﬀ.
 71. The Principles of Psychology, I, 316.

140
 72. Cf. R.A. Nicholson (ed. and tr.), The Mathnawi of
Jalalëddân Rëmâ, Vol. IV (Books i and ii - text), ii, w. 159-162
and 164.

73. Cf. ibid., Vol. IV, 2 (Books i and ii - translation), p. 230. It
is to be noted that quite  a few minor changes made by
Allama Iqbal in Nicholson’s English translation of the verses
quoted here from the Mathnawâ are due to his dropping
Nicholson’s parentheses used by him for keeping his
translation literally  as close to the text as it was possible.
Happily, Allama’s personal copies of Volumes 2-5 and 7 of
Nicholson’s edition of the Mathnawi are preserved in Allama
Iqbal Museum (Lahore) and it would be rewarding to study
his usual marginal marks and jottings on these volumes.

74. Cf. the Quranic verse 3:191 where so far as private
prayers are concerned the faithful ones are spoken of
remembering God standing and sitting and lying  on their
sides.
 75. The Qur’«n speaks of all mankind as ‘one community’;
see verses 2:213, 10:19.
 76. Ibid., 49:13.
 The Human Ego  – His Freedom  and  Immortality
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal

THE Qur’«n in its simple, forceful manner emphasizes the
individuality and uniqueness of man, and has, I think,  a
deﬁnite view of his destiny as a unity  of life.1 It is in
consequence of this view of man as a unique individuality
which makes it impossible for one individual to  bear the
burden of another,2 and entitles him only to what  is due to
his own personal eﬀort,3 that the Qur’«n is led to reject  the
idea of redemption. Three things are perfectly clear  from the
Qur’«n:

(i) That man is the chosen of God:

141
 ‘Afterwards his Lord chose him [Adam] for himself and
turned towards, him, and guided him, (20:122).
 (ii) That man, with all his faults, is meant to be the
representative of God on earth:

‘When thy Lord said to the angels, "Verily I am about to
place one in my stead on Earth", they said, ‘Wilt Thou place
there one who will do ill therein and shed blood, when we
celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness?’ God said,
"Verily I know what you know not", (2:30).

‘And it is He Who hath made you His representatives on the
Earth, and hath raised some of you above others by various
grades, that He may prove you by His gifts’ (6:165).
 (iii) That man is the trustee of a free personality which he
accepted at his peril:

‘Verily We proposed to the Heavens, and to the Earth, and to
the mountains to receive the "trust",  but they  refused the
burden and they feared to receive it. Man undertook to  bear
it, but hath proved unjust,  senseless!’ (33:72).

Yet it is surprising to see that the unity of human
consciousness which constitutes the centre of human
personality never really became a point of interest  in the
history of Muslim thought. The Mutakallimën regarded the
soul as a ﬁner kind of matter or a mere accident which dies
with the body and is re-created on the Day of Judgement.
The philosophers of Islam received inspiration from Greek
thought. In the case of other schools, it must be
remembered that the expansion of Islam brought within  its
fold peoples belonging to diﬀerent creed-communities,  such
as Nestorians, Jews, Zoroastrians, whose intellectual outlook
had been formed by the concepts of a culture which had
long dominated the whole of middle and western Asia. This
culture, on the whole Magian in its origin and development,

142
has a structurally dualistic soulpicture which  we ﬁnd more or
less reﬂected in the theological thought  of Islam.4
Devotional Suﬁsm alone tried to understand the meaning of
the unity of inner experience which the  Qur’«n declares to
be one of the three sources of knowledge,5 the other two
being History and Nature. The development of this
experience in the religious life of Islam reached its
culmination in the well-known words of Hall«j - ‘I am the
creative truth.’  The contemporaries of Hall«j, as well as his
successors, interpreted these words pantheistically; but the
fragments of Hall«j, collected and published by the French
Orientalist, L. Massignon, leave no doubt that the martyr-
saint could not have meant to deny the  transcendence of
God.6 The true interpretation of his experience, therefore, is
not the drop slipping into the  sea, but the realization and
bold aﬃrmation in an undying phrase of the  reality and
permanence of the human ego in a profounder personality.
The phrase of Hall«j seems almost a challenge ﬂung against
the Mutakallimën. The diﬃculty of modern  students of
religion, however, is that this type  of experience, though
perhaps perfectly normal in its beginnings, points, in  its
maturity, to  unknown levels of consciousness. Ibn Khaldën,
long ago, felt the necessity of an eﬀective  scientiﬁc method
to investigate these levels.7 Modern psychology has only
recently realized the necessity of such a method, but has
not yet been able to go beyond the discovery of the
characteristic features of the mystic  levels of
consciousness.8 Not being yet in possession of a scientiﬁc
method to deal with the type  of experience on which such
judgements as that of Hall«j are based, we cannot avail
ourselves of its possible capacity as a knowledge-yielding
experience. Nor can the concepts of theological systems,
draped in the terminology of a practically  dead
metaphysics, be of any help to those who happen to
possess a diﬀerent intellectual background. The task before

143
the modern Muslim is, therefore, immense. He has to
rethink the whole system of Islam without  completely
breaking with the past. Perhaps the ﬁrst Muslim who felt the
urge of a new spirit in him was Sh«h WalâAll«h of Delhi. The
man, however, who fully realized the importance and
immensity of the task, and whose deep insight into  the
inner meaning of the history of Muslim thought  and life,
combined with a broad vision engendered by his wide
experience of men and manners, would have made him a
living link between the past and the  future, was Jam«luddân
Afgh«nâ. If his indefatigable but divided energy could have
devoted itself entirely to  Islam as a system of human belief
and conduct, the world of Islam, intellectually  speaking,
would have been on a much more solid ground today. The
only course open to us is to approach modern knowledge
with a respectful but independent  attitude and to appreciate
the teachings of Islam in the light of  that knowledge, even
though we may be led to diﬀer from  those who have gone
before us. This I propose to do in regard to the subject of the
present lecture.

In the history of modern thought  it is Bradley who furnishes
the best evidence for the impossibility  of denying reality to
the ego. In his Ethical Studies9 he assumes the reality of the
self; in his Logic10 he takes it only as a working hypothesis.
It is in his Appearance and Reality that he subjects the ego
to a searching examination.11 Indeed, his two chapters on
the meaning and reality of the  self may be regarded as a
kind of modern Upanishad on the unreality of the Jâv«tm«.12
According to him, the test of reality  is freedom from
contradiction and since his criticism discovers the ﬁnite
centre of experience to be infected with  irreconcilable
oppositions of change and permanence, unity and diversity,
the ego is a mere illusion. Whatever may be our view of the
self - feeling, self-identity, soul, will - it  can be examined

144
only by the canons of thought which in its nature  is
relational, and all ‘relations involve  contradictions’. Yet, in
spite of the fact that  his ruthless logic has shown the ego to
be a mass of confusion, Bradley has to admit that the self
must be ‘in some sense real’, ‘in some sense an indubitable
fact’.13 We may easily grant that the ego, in its ﬁnitude, is
imperfect as a unity of life.  Indeed, its nature is wholly
aspiration after a unity more inclusive,  more eﬀective, more
balanced, and unique. Who knows how many diﬀerent kinds
of environment it needs for its organization  as a perfect
unity? At the present stage of its organization it  is unable to
maintain the continuity  of its tension without  constant
relaxation of sleep. An insigniﬁcant stimulus may sometimes
disrupt its unity and nullify  it as a controlling energy. Yet,
however thought may dissect and analyse, our feeling of
egohood is ultimate and is powerful enough to extract  from
Professor Bradley the reluctant admission of its reality.

The ﬁnite centre of experience, therefore, is real, even
though its reality is too profound  to be intellectualized. What
then is the characteristic feature  of the ego? The ego
reveals itself as a unity of what we call mental  states.
Mental states do not exist in mutual isolation.  They mean
and involve one another. They exist as phases of a complex
whole, called mind. The organic unity, however, of these
interrelated states or, let  us say, events is a special kind of
unity. It fundamentally diﬀers  from the unity of a material
thing; for the parts of  a material thing can exist in  mutual
isolation. Mental unity is absolutely unique. We cannot say
that one of my beliefs is situated on the  right or left  of my
other belief. Nor is it possible to say that my appreciation  of
the beauty of the T«j varies with my distance from  ÿgra. My
thought of space is not spatially related to  space. Indeed,
the ego can think of more than one space-order. The space
of waking consciousness and dream-space have no mutual
relation. They do not interfere with  or overlap each other.

145
For the body there can be but a single space. The ego,
therefore, is not space-bound in the sense in which the body
is space-bound. Again, mental and physical events are both
in time, but the time-span  of the ego is fundamentally
diﬀerent to the time-span  of the physical event. The
duration of the physical event is stretched  out in space as a
present fact; the ego’s duration is concentrated  within it and
linked with its present and future  in a unique manner. The
formation of a physical event discloses certain present
marks which show that it has passed through a time-
duration; but these marks are merely emblematic  of its time
duration; not time-duration  itself. True time–duration
belongs to the ego alone.

Another important characteristic  of the unity of the  ego is its
essential privacy which reveals the uniqueness of every ego.
In order to reach a certain conclusion all the premisses of a
syllogism must be believed in by one and the same mind. If
I believe in the proposition ‘all men are mortal’,  and another
mind believes in the proposition ‘Socrates is a man’, no
inference is possible. It is possible only if both the
propositions are believed in by me. Again, my desire for a
certain thing is essentially mine. Its satisfaction  means my
private enjoyment. If all mankind  happen to desire the same
thing, the satisfaction of their  desire will not mean the
satisfaction of my desire when I do not get the thing
desired. The dentist may sympathize with my toothache,
but cannot experience the feeling of my  toothache. My
pleasures, pains, and desires are exclusively mine, forming
a part and parcel of my private ego alone. My feelings,
hates and loves, judgements and resolutions, are
exclusively mine. God Himself cannot feel, judge, and
choose for me when more than one course of action are
open to me. Similarly, in order to recognize you, I must have
known you in the past. My recognition of a place or person
means reference to my past experience, and not the past

146
experience of another ego. It is this unique interrelation  of
our mental states14 that we express by the word ‘I’, and it is
here that the great problem of  psychology begins to appear.
What is the nature of this ‘I’? To the Muslim school of
theology of which Ghazz«lâ is the chief exponent,15 the ego
is a simple, indivisible, and immutable soul-substance,
entirely diﬀerent  from the group of our mental states  and
unaﬀected by the passage of time. Our conscious
experience is a unity, because our mental states are related
as so many qualities to this simple substance which persists
unchanged during the ﬂux of its qualities.  My recognition of
you is possible only if I persist unchanged between the
original perception and the present act of memory. The
interest of this school, however, was not so much
psychological as metaphysical. But whether we take the
soul-entity as an explanation of the facts of our conscious
experience, or as a basis for immortality, I am afraid it
serves neither psychological nor metaphysical interest.
Kant’s fallacies of pure reason are well known to the student
of modern philosophy.16 The ‘I think’, which accompanies
every thought is, according to Kant, a purely formal
condition of thought, and the  transition from a purely formal
condition of thought to ontological  substance is logically
illegitimate.17 Even apart from Kant’s way of looking at the
subject of experience, the indivisibility  of a substance does
not prove its indestructibility;  for the indivisible  substance,
as Kant himself remarks, may gradually disappear into
nothingness like an intensive quality or cease to exist all of
a sudden.18 Nor can this static view of substance serve any
psychological interest. In the ﬁrst place, it  is diﬃcult to
regard the elements of our conscious experience as
qualities of a soul-substance in the sense in which, for
instance, the weight of a physical body is the quality  of that
body. Observation reveals experience to be particular acts
of reference, and as such they possess a speciﬁc being of

147
their own. They constitute, as Laird acutely remarks, ‘a new
world and not merely new features in an old world’.
Secondly, even if we regard experiences as qualities, we
cannot discover how they inhere in the soul-substance. Thus
we see that our conscious experience can give us no clue to
the ego regarded as a soul-substance; for by hypothesis the
soul-substance does not reveal itself in experience. And it
may further be pointed out  that in view of the  improbability
of diﬀerent soul-substances controlling the same body at
diﬀerent times, the  theory can oﬀer no adequate
explanation of phenomena such as alternating personality,
formerly explained by the temporary  possession of the body
by evil spirits.

Yet the interpretation of our conscious experience is the only
road by which we can reach the ego, if at all. Let us,
therefore, turn to modern psychology and see what light  it
throws on the nature of the ego. William James conceives
consciousness as ‘a stream of thought’ - a conscious ﬂow of
changes with a felt continuity.19 He ﬁnds a kind of
gregarious principle working in our experiences which have,
as it were, ‘hooks’ on them, and thereby catch up one
another in the ﬂow of mental  life.20 The ego consists of the
feelings of personal life, and is, as such, part of the system
of thought. Every pulse of thought, present or  perishing, is
an indivisible unity which knows and recollects. The
appropriation of the passing pulse by the present pulse of
thought, and that of the  present by its successor, is the
ego.21 This description of our mental life is extremely
ingenious; but not, I venture to think,  true to consciousness
as we ﬁnd it in ourselves. Consciousness is something
single, presupposed in all mental life, and not bits of
consciousness, mutually reporting to one another. This view
of consciousness, far from giving us any clue to the ego,
entirely ignores the relatively  permanent element in

148
experience. There is no continuity of being between the
passing thoughts. When one of these is present, the other
has totally disappeared; and how can the passing thought,
which is irrevocably lost, be known and appropriated by the
present thought? I do not mean to say that  the ego is over
and above the mutually penetrating  multiplicity  we call
experience. Inner experience is the ego at work. We
appreciate the ego itself in the  act of perceiving, judging,
and willing. The life of the ego is a kind of tension caused by
the ego invading the environment  and the environment
invading the ego. The ego does not stand outside this arena
of mutual invasion. It is present in it  as a directive energy
and is formed and disciplined by its own experience. The
Qur’«n is clear on this directive function  of the ego:

‘And they ask thee of the soul. Say: the soul proceedeth
from my Lord’s Amr [Command]: but of knowledge, only  a
little to  you is given’ (17:85).

In order to understand the meaning of the  word Amr, we
must remember the distinction  which the Qur’«n draws
between Amr and Khalq. Pringle-Pattison deplores that the
English language possesses only one word - ‘creation’ - to
express the relation of God and the universe of extension on
the one hand, and the relation of God and the human ego
on the other. The Arabic language is, however, more
fortunate in this  respect. It has two words: Khalq and Amr to
express the two ways in which the creative activity  of God
reveals itself to us. Khalq is creation; Amr is direction. As the
Qur’«n says: ‘To Him belong creation and direction.’22 The
verse quoted above means that the essential nature  of the
soul is directive, as it proceeds from the directive  energy of
God, though we do not know how Divine Amr functions as
ego-unities. The personal pronoun used in the expression
Rabbâ (‘my Lord’) throws further light  on the nature and
behaviour of the ego. It is meant to  suggest that the soul

149
must be taken as something individual and speciﬁc, with all
the variations in the range, balance, and eﬀectiveness of its
unity. ‘Every man acteth after his own manner: but  your
Lord well knoweth who is best guided in his path’ (17:84).
Thus my real personality is not a thing; it  is an act. My
experience is only a series of acts, mutually referring to one
another, and held together by the  unity of a directive
purpose. My whole reality lies in my directive attitude.  You
cannot perceive me like a thing in space, or a set of
experiences in temporal order; you must interpret,
understand, and appreciate me in my judgements, in my
will-attitudes, aims, and aspirations.

The next question is: how does the ego emerge within the
spatio-temporal order?23 The teaching of the Qur’«n is
perfectly clear on this point:

‘Now of ﬁne clay We have created man: Then We placed
him, a moist germ, in a safe abode; then made We the moist
germ a clot of blood: then made the clotted  blood into a
piece of ﬂesh; then made the piece of ﬂesh into bones: and
We clothed the bones with ﬂesh; then brought forth  man of
yet another make.

‘Blessed, therefore, be God - the most excellent of makers’
(23:12-14).

The ‘yet another make’ of man develops on the basis of
physical organism - that colony of sub-egos through which a
profounder Ego constantly acts on me, and thus permits me
to build up a systematic unity  of experience. Are then the
soul and its organism two things in the sense of Descartes,
independent of each other, though somehow mysteriously
united? I am inclined to think that  the hypothesis of matter
as an independent existence is perfectly gratuitous. It  can
be justiﬁed only on the ground of our sensation of which

150
matter is supposed to be at least a part cause, other than
myself. This something other than myself is supposed to
possess certain qualities, called primary which correspond
to certain sensations in me; and I justify my  belief in those
qualities on the ground that the  cause must have some
resemblance with the eﬀect. But there  need be no
resemblance between cause and eﬀect. If my success in life
causes misery to another man, my success and his misery
have no resemblance with each other. Yet everyday
experience and physical science proceed on the assumption
of an independent existence of matter. Let us, therefore,
provisionally assume that body and soul are two mutually
independent, yet in some mysterious way united,  things. It
was Descartes who ﬁrst stated the problem, and I believe
his statement and ﬁnal view of the  problem were largely
inﬂuenced by the Manichaean inheritance of early
Christianity. However, if they are mutually independent  and
do not aﬀect each other, then the  changes of both run on
exactly parallel lines, owing to some kind of pre-established
harmony, as Leibniz thought. This reduces the soul to a
merely passive spectator of the happenings of the body. If,
on the other hand, we suppose them to aﬀect each other,
then we cannot ﬁnd any observable facts to show how and
where exactly their interaction  takes place, and which of the
two takes the initiative.  The soul is an organ of the body
which exploits it for physiological purposes, or the body is
an instrument of the soul, are equally true  propositions on
the theory of interaction.  Lange’s theory of emotion tends to
show that the body takes the initiative  in the act of
interaction.24 There are, however, facts to contradict this
theory, and it is not possible to detail  these facts here.
Suﬃce it to indicate that  even if the body takes the
initiative, the  mind does enter as a consenting factor at a
deﬁnite stage in the development  of emotion, and this is
equally true of other external  stimuli which are constantly

151
working on the mind. Whether an emotion will  grow further,
or that a stimulus will  continue to work, depends on my
attending to it.  It is the mind’s consent which eventually
decides the fate of an emotion or a stimulus.

Thus parallelism and interaction are both unsatisfactory. Yet
mind and body become one in action. When I take up a book
from my table, my act  is single and indivisible. It is
impossible to draw a line of cleavage between the share of
the body and that of the  mind in this act. Somehow they
must belong to the same system, and according to the
Qur’«n they do belong to the same system.25 ‘To Him belong
Khalq (creation) and Amr (direction),26 how is such a thing
conceivable? We have seen that the body is not a thing
situated in an absolute void; it  is a system of events or
acts.27 The system of experiences we call soul or ego is also
a system of acts. This does not obliterate the distinction  of
soul and body; it only brings them closer to  each other. The
characteristic of the ego is spontaneity;  the acts composing
the body repeat themselves. The body is accumulated
action or habit of the soul; and as such undetachable from
it. It is a permanent element  of consciousness which, in view
of this permanent element,  appears from the outside as
something stable. What then is matter? A colony of egos of
a low order out of which emerges the ego of a higher order,
when their association and interaction reach a certain
degree of coordination. It is the world reaching the  point of
self-guidance wherein the Ultimate Reality, perhaps, reveals
its secret, and furnishes a clue to its ultimate  nature. The
fact that the  higher emerges out of the lower does not rob
the higher of its worth  and dignity. It is not the origin  of a
thing that matters,  it is the capacity,  the signiﬁcance, and
the ﬁnal reach of the emergent  that matter. Even if we
regard the basis of soul-life as purely physical, it by no
means follows that the emergent  can be resolved into what

152
has conditioned its birth and growth. The emergent, as the
advocates of the Emergent Evolution teach us, is an
unforeseeable and novel fact on its own plane of being, and
cannot be explained mechanistically. Indeed the evolution of
life shows that, though in the beginning  the mental is
dominated by the physical, the mental,  as it grows in power,
tends to dominate the physical and may eventually  rise to a
position of complete independence. Nor is there such a
thing as a purely physical level in the sense of possessing a
materiality, elementally  incapable of evolving the creative
synthesis we call life and mind, and needing a
transcendental Deity to impregnate  it with the sentient  and
the mental. The Ultimate Ego that makes the emergent
emerge is immanent in Nature, and is described by the
Qur’«n, as ‘the First and the Last, the Visible and the
Invisible.’28

This view of the matter raises a very important  question. We
have seen that the ego is not something rigid.  It organizes
itself in time, and is formed and disciplined  by its own
experience. It is further clear that  streams of causality ﬂow
into it from Nature and from it  to Nature. Does the ego then
determine its own activity? If so, how is the self-
determination of the ego related  to the determinism of the
spatio-temporal order? Is personal causality a special kind of
causality, or only a disguised form of the mechanism of
Nature? It is claimed that the two kinds of determinism  are
not mutually exclusive and that  the scientiﬁc method is
equally applicable to human action. The human act of
deliberation is understood to be a conﬂict of  motives which
are conceived, not as the ego’s own present or inherited
tendencies of action or inaction, but as so many external
forces ﬁghting one another, gladiator-like, on the arena of
the mind. Yet the ﬁnal choice is regarded as a fact
determined by the strongest force, and not  by the resultant
of contending motives, like a purely physical eﬀect.29 I am,

153
however, ﬁrmly of the opinion that  the controversy between
the advocates of Mechanism and Freedom arises from a
wrong view of intelligent action  which modern psychology,
unmindful of its own independence as a science, possessing
a special set of facts to observe, was bound to take on
account of its slavish imitation of physical sciences. The
view that ego-activity  is a succession of thoughts and ideas,
ultimately resolvable to units  of sensations, is only another
form of atomic materialism  which forms the basis of modern
science. Such a view could not but raise a strong
presumption in favour of a mechanistic interpretation  of
consciousness. There is, however, some relief in thinking
that the new German psychology, known as Conﬁguration
Psychology,30 may succeed in securing the independence of
Psychology as a science, just as the theory of Emergent
Evolution may eventually bring about the  independence of
Biology. This newer German psychology teaches us that a
careful study of intelligent  behaviour discloses the fact of
‘insight’ over and above the mere  succession of
sensations.31 This ‘insight’ is the ego’s appreciation of
temporal, spatial, and causal relation of things - the  choice,
that is to say of data, in a complex whole, in view  of the
goal or purpose which the ego has set before itself for the
time being. It is this sense of striving in  the experience of
purposive action and the success which I actually achieve in
reaching my ‘ends’ that convince me of  my eﬃciency as a
personal cause. The essential feature of a purposive act is
its vision of a future situation  which does not appear to
admit any explanation in terms  of Physiology. The truth is
that the causal chain wherein we try to  ﬁnd a place for the
ego is itself an artiﬁcial construction  of the ego for its own
purposes. The ego is called upon to live in a complex
environment, and he cannot maintain his life  in it without
reducing it to a system which would give him  some kind of
assurance as to the behaviour of things around him. The

154
view of his environment as a system of cause and eﬀect is
thus an indispensable instrument of the ego, and not a ﬁnal
expression of the nature of Reality. Indeed in interpreting
Nature in this way the ego understands and masters its
environment, and thereby acquires and ampliﬁes its
freedom.32

Thus the element of guidance and directive control in the
ego’s activity clearly shows that the  ego is a free personal
causality. He shares in the life and freedom of the Ultimate
Ego who, by permitting the emergence of a ﬁnite  ego,
capable of private initiative,  has limited this freedom of  His
own free will. This freedom of conscious behaviour follows
from the view of egoactivity  which the Qur’«n takes. There
are verses which are unmistakably clear on this point:

‘And say: The truth is from your Lord: Let him, then, who
will, believe: and let him who will,  be an unbeliever’ (18:29).
 ‘If ye do well to your own behoof will ye do well: and if ye do
evil against yourselves will ye do it’  (17:7).

Indeed Islam recognizes a very important fact of human
psychology, i.e. the rise and fall of the power to act  freely,
and is anxious to retain the power to act freely  as a constant
and undiminished factor in the life  of the ego. The timing of
the daily prayer which, according to the  Qur’«n, restores
‘self-possession’ to the ego by bringing it into closer touch
with the ultimate  source of life and freedom, is intended to
save the ego from the mechanizing eﬀects of sleep and
business. Prayer in Islam is the ego’s escape from
mechanism to freedom.

It cannot, however, be denied that the idea of  destiny runs
throughout the Qur’«n. This point is worth considering, more
especially because Spengler in his Decline of the West
seems to think that Islam amounts to a complete  negation

155
of the ego.33 I have already explained to you my view of
Taqdâr (destiny) as we ﬁnd it in the Qur’«n.34 As Spengler
himself points out, there are two  ways of making the world
our own. The one is intellectual; the other, for  want of a
better expression, we may call vital.  The intellectual way
consists in understanding the world as a rigid system of
cause and eﬀect. The vital is the absolute acceptance of the
inevitable necessity of life, regarded as a whole which in
evolving its inner richness creates serial time. This vital  way
of appropriating the universe is what  the Qur’«n describes
as Im«n. Im«n is not merely a passive belief in one or more
propositions of a certain kind; it  is living assurance begotten
of a rare experience. Strong personalities alone are capable
of rising to this experience and the higher  ‘Fatalism’ implied
in it. Napoleon is reported to have said: ‘I am a thing,  not a
person’. This is one way in which unitive experience
expresses itself. In the history of religious experience in
Islam which, according to the Prophet, consists in the
‘creation of Divine attributes  in man’, this experience has
found expression in such phrases as ‘I am the creative truth’
(Àall«j), ‘I am Time’ (Muhammad), ‘I am the speaking
Qur’«n’ (‘Alâ), ‘Glory to me’  (B«Yazâd). In the higher Suﬁsm
of Islam unitive experience is not the  ﬁnite ego eﬀacing its
own identity by some sort of absorption  into the inﬁnite  Ego;
it is rather the  Inﬁnite passing into the loving embrace of
the ﬁnite.35 As Rëmâ says:

‘Divine knowledge is lost in the knowledge of the  saint! And
how is it possible for people to believe in such a thing?’

The fatalism implied in this attitude  is not negation of the
ego as Spengler seems to think; it is life and boundless
power which recognizes no obstruction, and can make a
man calmly oﬀer his prayers when bullets are showering
around him.

156
But is it not true, you will  say, that a most degrading type of
Fatalism has prevailed in the world of Islam for many
centuries? This is true, and has a history behind it which
requires separate treatment. It is suﬃcient  here to indicate
that the kind of Fatalism which the European critics of Islam
sum up in the word Qismat was due partly to philosophical
thought, partly to  political expediency, and partly  to the
gradually diminishing force of the lifeimpulse,  which Islam
originally imparted to  its followers. Philosophy, searching for
the meaning of cause as applied to God, and taking time as
the essence of the relation between cause and eﬀect, could
not but reach the notion of a transcendent  God, prior to the
universe, and operating upon it from without.  God was thus
conceived as the last link in the chain of causation, and,
consequently, the real author of all that  happens in the
universe. Now the practical materialism of the  opportunist
Umayyad rulers of Damascus needed a peg on which to
hang their misdeeds at Karbal«, and to secure the fruits of
Amâr Mu’«wâyy«h’s revolt against the possibilities of a
popular rebellion. Ma’bad is reported to have said to Àasan
of BaÄra that the Umayyads killed Muslims, and attributed
their acts to the decrees of God. ‘These enemies of God’,
replied Àasan, ‘are liars.’36 Thus arose, in spite of open
protests by Muslim divines, a morally degrading Fatalism,
and the constitutional theory  known as the ‘accomplished
fact’37 in order to support vested interests. This is not at all
surprising. In our own times philosophers have furnished a
kind of intellectual justiﬁcation  for the ﬁnality  of the present
capitalistic structure of society. Hegel’s view of Reality as an
inﬁnitude of reason from which follows the essential
rationality of the  real, and Auguste Comte’s society as an
organism in which speciﬁc functions are eternally assigned
to each organ, are instances in point. The same thing
appears to have happened in Islam. But since Muslims have
always sought the justiﬁcation of their  varying attitudes  in

157
the Qur’«n, even though at the expense of its plain  meaning
the fatalistic interpretation  has had very far-reaching eﬀects
on Muslim peoples. I could, in this connexion, quote several
instances of obvious misinterpretation; but  the subject
requires special treatment, and it is time  now to turn to the
question of immortality.

No age has produced so much literature on the question of
immortality as our own, and this  literature is continually
increasing in spite of the victories of modern Materialism.
Purely metaphysical arguments, however, cannot give us a
positive belief in personal immortality.  In the history of
Muslim thought Ibn Rushd approached the question of
immortality from  a purely metaphysical point of view,  and, I
venture to think, achieved no results. He drew a distinction
between sense and intelligence probably because of the
expressions, Nafs and Rëh, used in the Qur’«n. These
expressions, apparently suggesting a conﬂict between two
opposing principles in man, have misled many a thinker in
Islam. However, if Ibn Rushd’s dualism was based on the
Qur’«n, then I am afraid he was mistaken; for the word Nafs
does not seem to have been used in the Qur’«n in any
technical sense of the kind imagined by Muslim theologians.
Intelligence, according to Ibn Rushd, is not a form of the
body; it belongs to a diﬀerent  order of being, and
transcends individuality. It is, therefore, one, universal, and
eternal. This obviously means that, since unitary intellect
transcends individuality, its appearance as so many unities
in the multiplicity  of human persons is a mere illusion. The
eternal unity of intellect  may mean, as Renan thinks, the
everlastingness of humanity and civilization;  it does not
surely mean personal immortality.38 In fact Ibn Rushd’s view
looks like William James’s suggestion of a transcendental
mechanism of consciousness which operates on a physical
medium for a while, and then gives it up  in pure sport.39

158
In modern times the line of argument  for personal
immortality is on the  whole ethical. But ethical arguments,
such as that of Kant, and the modern revisions of his
arguments, depend on a kind of faith in the fulﬁlment  of the
claims of justice, or in the irreplaceable and unique work of
man as an individual pursuer of inﬁnite ideals. With Kant
immortality is beyond the  scope of speculative reason; it is
a postulate of practical reason, an axiom of man’s moral
consciousness. Man demands and pursues the supreme
good which comprises both virtue and happiness. But virtue
and happiness, duty and inclination, are, according to Kant,
heterogeneous notions. Their unity cannot be achieved
within the narrow span of the pursuer’s life  in this sensible
world. We are, therefore, driven to postulate immortal  life
for the person’s progressive completion of the unity  of the
mutually exclusive notions of virtue  and happiness, and the
existence of God eventually to eﬀectuate this  conﬂuence. It
is not clear, however, why the consummation of virtue  and
happiness should take inﬁnite time, and how God can
eﬀectuate the conﬂuence between mutually  exclusive
notions. This inconclusiveness of metaphysical arguments
has led many thinkers to conﬁne themselves to meeting  the
objections of modern Materialism which rejects immortality,
holding that consciousness is merely a function of the brain,
and therefore ceases with the cessation of the brain-
process. William James thinks that this objection to
immortality is valid  only if the function  in question is taken
to be productive.40 The mere fact that certain mental
changes vary concomitantly with certain  bodily changes,
does not warrant the inference that  mental changes are
produced by bodily changes. The function is not necessarily
productive; it may be permissive or transmissive  like the
function of the trigger  of a crossbow or that of a reﬂecting
lens.41 This view which suggests that our inner life is due to
the operation in us of a kind of transcendental mechanism

159
of consciousness, somehow choosing a physical medium for
a short period of sport, does not give us any assurance of
the continuance of the content of our  actual experience. I
have already indicated in these lectures the proper way to
meet Materialism.42 Science must necessarily select for
study certain speciﬁc aspects of Reality only and exclude
others. It is pure dogmatism on the part  of science to claim
that the aspects of Reality selected by it are the  only
aspects to be studied. No doubt man has a spatial aspect;
but this is not the only aspect of man. There are other
aspects of man, such as evaluation, the unitary character of
purposive experience, and the pursuit of truth  which science
must necessarily exclude from its study, and the
understanding of which requires categories other than those
employed by science.43

There is, however, in the history of modern thought one
positive view of immortality  - I mean Nietzsche’s doctrine of
Eternal Recurrence.44 This view deserves some
consideration, not only because Nietzsche has maintained it
with a prophetical fervour, but  also because it reveals a real
tendency in the modern mind. The idea occurred to several
minds about the time when it  came to Nietzsche like a
poetic inspiration, and the germs of its  are also found in
Herbert Spencer.45 It was really the power of the idea rather
than its logical demonstration that  appealed to this modern
prophet. This, in itself, is some evidence of the fact that
positive views of ultimate things  are the work rather of
Inspiration than Metaphysics. However, Nietzsche has given
his doctrine the form of a reasoned out theory, and as such I
think we are entitled to  examine it. The doctrine proceeds
on the assumption that the quantity  of energy in the
universe is constant and consequently ﬁnite. Space is only a
subjective form; there is no meaning in saying that  the
world is in space in the sense that it is situated in an

160
absolute empty void. In his view of time,  however, Nietzsche
parts company with Kant and Schopenhauer. Time is not a
subjective form; it is a real and inﬁnite  process which can be
conceived only as ‘Periodic’.46 Thus it is clear that there can
be no dissipation of energy in an inﬁnite empty  space. The
centres of this energy are limited in number,  and their
combination perfectly calculable. There is no beginning or
end of this ever-active energy, no equilibrium, no ﬁrst  or last
change. Since time is inﬁnite, therefore all possible
combinations of energycentres have already been
exhausted. There is no new happening in the universe;
whatever happens now has happened before an inﬁnite
number of times, and will continue to  happen an inﬁnite
number of times in the future.  On Nietzsche’s view the order
of happenings in the universe must be ﬁxed and
unalterable; for since an inﬁnite time  has passed, the
energycentres must have, by this time, formed  certain
deﬁnite modes of behaviour. The very word ‘Recurrence’
implies this ﬁxity. Further, we must conclude that  a
combination of energycentres which has once taken place
must always return; otherwise there would be no guarantee
for the return even of the superman.

‘Everything has returned: Sirius and the spider, and thy
thoughts at this moment  and this last thought of thine  that
all things will return . . . . Fellow-man! your whole life,  like a
sand-glass, will always be reversed, and will ever run out
again. This ring in which you are but a gain will glitter  afresh
for ever.’47

Such is Nietzsche’s Eternal Recurrence. It is only a more
rigid kind of mechanism, based not on an ascertained fact
but only on a working hypothesis of science. Nor does
Nietzsche seriously grapple with the question of time. He
takes it objectively and regards it merely  as an inﬁnite
series of events returning to itself over  and over again. Now

161
time, regarded as a perpetual circular movement,  makes
immortality absolutely  intolerable. Nietzsche himself feels
this, and describes his doctrine, not as one of immortality,
but rather as a view of life which would make immortality
endurable.48 And what makes immortality bearable,
according to Nietzsche? It is the expectation that a
recurrence of the combination of energy-centres which
constitutes my personal existence is a necessary factor in
the birth of that  ideal combination which he calls
‘superman’. But the superman has been an inﬁnite number
of times before. His birth is inevitable; how can the  prospect
give me any aspiration? We can aspire only for what is
absolutely new, and the absolutely new is unthinkable on
Nietzsche’s view which is nothing more than a Fatalism
worse than the one summed up in the word Qismat. Such a
doctrine, far from keying up the  human organism for the
ﬁght of life, tends to  destroy its action-tendencies and
relaxes the tension of the ego.49

Passing now to the teaching of the Qur’«n. The Quranic view
of the destiny of man is partly  ethical, partly biological. I say
partly biological because the Qur’«n makes in this
connexion certain statements of a biological nature  which
we cannot understand without a deeper insight  into the
nature of life. It mentions, for  instance, the fact of Barzakh50
- a state, perhaps of some kind of suspense between Death
and Resurrection. Resurrection, too, appears to have been
diﬀerently conceived. The Qur’«n does not base its
possibility, like Christianity, on the evidence of  the actual
resurrection of an historic person. It seems to take and
argue resurrection as a universal phenomenon of life, in
some sense, true even of birds and animals (6:38).

Before, however, we take the details of the Quranic doctrine
of personal immortality we must  note three things which are

162
perfectly clear from the Qur’«n and regarding  which there is,
or ought to be, no diﬀerence of opinion:

(i) That the ego has a beginning in time, and did not pre-
exist its emergence in the spatiotemporal  order. This is clear
from the verse which I cited a few minutes ago.51
 (ii) That according to the Quranic view, there is no
possibility of return to this  earth. This is clear from the
following verses:

‘When death overtaketh one of them, he saith, "Lord!  send
me back again, that I may do the good that  I have left
undone!" By no means These are the very words which he
shall speak. But behind them is a barrier (BarzakhBarzakh
100).

‘And by the moon when at her full, that  from state to state
shall ye be surely carried onward’ (84:18-19).

‘The germs of life - Is it ye who create them? Or are We their
Creator? It is We Who have decreed that death should be
among you; yet We are not thereby hindered from replacing
you with others, your likes, or from creating  you again in
forms which ye know not!’ (56:58-61).

(iii) That ﬁnitude is not a misfortune:

‘Verily there is none in the heavens and in the earth but
shall approach the God of Mercy as a servant. He hath taken
note of them and numbered them with  exact numbering:
and each of them shall come to Him on the Day of
Resurrection as a single individual’ (19:93-95).52

This is a very important point and must be properly
understood with a view to secure a clear insight into  the
Islamic theory of salvation. It is with the  irreplaceable
singleness of his idividuality that the  ﬁnite ego will approach

163
the inﬁnite ego to see for himself  the consequences of his
past action and to judge the possibilities of his future.

‘And every man’s fate have We fastened about his neck:
and on the Day of Resurrection will We bring forthwith to
him a book which shall be proﬀered to him wide open:
"Read thy book: there needeth none but thyself to make out
an account against thee this day" (17:13-14).

Whatever may be the ﬁnal fate of man it  does not mean the
loss of individuality. The Qur’«n does not contemplate
complete liberation from ﬁnitude  as the highest state of
human bliss. The ‘unceasing reward’53 of man consists in his
gradual growth in self-possession, in uniqueness, and
intensity of his activity  as an ego. Even the scene of
‘Universal Destruction’ immediately  preceding the Day of
Judgement54 cannot aﬀect the perfect calm of a full-grown
ego:

‘And there shall be a blast on the trumpet,  and all who are
in the heavens and all who are in the earth shall faint  away,
save those in whose case God wills otherwise’ (39:68).55

Who can be the subject of this exception but those in whom
the ego has reached the very highest point of intensity?  And
the climax of this development  is reached when the ego is
able to retain full self-possession, even in the case of a
direct contact with the  all-embracing Ego. As the Qur’«n
says of the Prophet’s vision of the Ultimate Ego:

‘His eye turned not aside, nor did it wander’  (53:17).

This is the ideal of perfect manhood in Islam. Nowhere has it
found a better literary  expression than in a Persian verse
which speaks of the Holy Prophet’s experience of Divine
illumination:

164
‘Moses fainted away by a mere surface illumination of
Reality. Thou seest the very substance of Reality with a
smile!’56

Pantheistic Suﬁsm obviously cannot favour such a view, and
suggests diﬃculties of a philosophical nature. How can the
Inﬁnite and the ﬁnite  egos mutually exclude each other?
Can the ﬁnite ego, as such, retain its ﬁnitude besides the
Inﬁnite Ego? This diﬃculty is based on a misunderstanding
of the true nature of the  Inﬁnite. True inﬁnity does not mean
inﬁnite extension which cannot be conceived without
embracing all available ﬁnite extensions. Its nature  consists
in intensity and not extensity;  and the moment we ﬁx  our
gaze on intensity, we begin to see that the ﬁnite  ego must
be distinct, though not isolated, from  the Inﬁnite.
Extensively regarded I am absorbed by the spatio-temporal
order to which I belong. Intensively regarded I consider the
same spatio-temporal order as a confronting ‘other’  wholly
alien to me. I am distinct from  and yet intimately  related to
that on which I depend for my life and sustenance.

With these three points clearly grasped, the rest of the
doctrine is easy to conceive. It is open to man, according to
the Qur’«n, to belong to the meaning of the  universe and
become immortal.

‘Thinketh man that he shall be left as a thing  of no use? Was
he not a mere embryo? ‘Then he became thick blood of
which God formed him and fashioned him; and made him
twain, male and female. Is not God powerful enough to
quicken the dead?’ (75:36-40).

It is highly improbable that  a being whose evolution has
taken millions of years should be thrown away as a thing of
no use. But it is only as an ever-growing ego that he can
belong to the meaning of the universe:

165
‘By the soul and He Who hath balanced it, and hath shown
to it the ways of wickedness and piety, blessed is he who
hath made it grow and undone is he who hath corrupted it’
(91:7-9).
 And how to make the soul grow and save it from corruption?
By action:

‘Blessed be He in Whose hand is the Kingdom! And over all
things is He potent, who hath created death and life to  test
which of you is the best in point of deed; and He is the
Mighty and Forgiving’ (67:1-2).57

Life oﬀers a scope for ego-activity, and death is the ﬁrst  test
of the synthetic activity  of the ego. There are no pleasure-
giving and pain-giving acts; there are only ego-sustaining
and egodissolving acts. It is the deed that prepares the ego
for dissolution, or disciplines him for a future  career. The
principle of the ego-sustaining deed is respect for the ego in
myself as well as in others. Personal immortality, then, is
not ours as of right; it is to be achieved by  personal eﬀort.
Man is only a candidate for it. The most depressing error of
Materialism is the supposition that ﬁnite  consciousness
exhausts its object. Philosophy and science are only one
way of approaching that object. There are other ways of
approach open to us; and death, if present action has
suﬃciently fortiﬁed  the ego against the shock that physical
dissolution brings, is only a kind of passage to what the
Qur’«n describes as Barzakh. The records of Suﬁstic
experience indicate that Barzakh is a state of consciousness
characterized by a change in the ego’s attitude  towards
time and space. There is nothing improbable in it. It was
Helmholtz who ﬁrst discovered that nervous excitation  takes
time to reach consciousness.58 If this is so, our present
physiological structure is at the bottom  of our present view
of time, and if the ego survives the dissolution  of this
structure, a change in our attitude  towards time and space

166
seems perfectly natural. Nor is such a change wholly
unknown to us. The enormous condensation of impressions
which occurs in our dream-life, and the exaltation of
memory, which sometimes takes place at the moment  of
death, disclose the ego’s capacity for diﬀerent  standards of
time. The state of Barzakh, therefore, does not seem to be
merely a passive state of expectation; it  is a state in which
the ego catches a glimpse of fresh aspects of Reality, and
prepares himself for adjustment to these aspects. It must  be
a state of great psychic unhingement, especially in the  case
of full-grown egos who have naturally developed ﬁxed
modes of operation on a speciﬁc spatio-temporal order, and
may mean dissolution to less fortunate ones. However, the
ego must continue to struggle until  he is able to gather
himself up, and win his resurrection. The resurrection,
therefore, is not an external event. It  is the consummation
of a life-process within the ego. Whether individual or
universal it is nothing more than a kind  of stock-taking of
the ego’s past achievements and his future possibilities. The
Qur’«n argues the phenomenon of re-emergence of the ego
on the analogy of his ﬁrst emergence:

‘Man saith: "What! After I am dead, shall I in the end be
brought forth alive?" Doth not man  bear in mind that We
made him at ﬁrst when he was nought?’ (19:66-67).

‘It is We Who have decreed that death should be among
you. Yet We are not thereby hindered from replacing you
with others your likes, or from producing you in  a form
which ye know not! Ye have known the ﬁrst creation: will
you not reﬂect?’ (56:60-62).

How did man ﬁrst emerge? This suggestive argument
embodied in the last verses of the two passages quoted
above did in fact open a new vista to Muslim philosophers. It
was J«Áiz (d. 255 A.H.) who ﬁrst hinted at the changes in

167
animal life caused by migrations and environment
generally.59 The association known as the ‘Brethren of
Purity’ further ampliﬁed  the views of J«Áiz.60 Ibn Maskawaih
(d. 421 A.H.), however, was the ﬁrst Muslim thinker to give a
clear and in many respects thoroughly modern theory of the
origin of man.61 It was only natural and perfectly consistent
with the spirit of the  Qur’«n, that Rëmâ regarded the
question of immortality  as one of biological evolution, and
not a problem to be decided by arguments of purely
metaphysical nature, as some philosophers of Islam had
thought. The theory of evolution, however, has brought
despair and anxiety, instead of hope and enthusiasm for
life, to the modern world. The reason is to be found in the
unwarranted modern assumption that man’s present
structure, mental as well as physiological, is the last word in
biological evolution, and that death,  regarded as a biological
event, has no constructive meaning. The world of today
needs a Rëmâ to create an attitude of hope, and to kindle
the ﬁre of enthusiasm for life. His inimitable  lines may be
quoted here:

First man appeared in the class of inorganic things, Next he
passed therefrom into that of plants. 
For years he lived as one of the plants, 
Remembering naught of his inorganic state so diﬀerent; And
when he passed from the vegetive to the animal state  He
had no remembrance of his state as a plant, 
Except the inclination he felt to the  world of plants,
Especially at the time of spring and sweet ﬂowers. Like the
inclination of infants towards their  mothers, Which know not
the cause of their inclination to the  breast. Again the great
Creator, as you know, 
Drew man out of the animal into the  human state. Thus man
passed from one order of nature to another, Till he became
wise and knowing and strong as he is now. Of his ﬁrst souls

168
he has now no remembrance. 
And he will be again changed from his present soul.62

The point, however, which has caused much diﬀerence of
opinion among Muslim philosophers and theologians is
whether the re-emergence of man involves the re-
emergence of his former physical medium. Most of them,
including Sh«h WalâAll«h, the last great theologian of Islam,
are inclined to think that  it does involve at least some kind
of physical medium suitable to the ego’s new environment.
It seems to me that this view is mainly  due to the fact that
the ego, as an individual, is inconceivable without some kind
of local reference or empirical background. The following
verses, however, throw some light on the point:

‘What! when dead and turned to dust, shall we rise again?

‘Remote is such a return. Now know We what the Earth
consumeth of them and with Us is a book in which account
is kept ‘ (50:3-4).63
To my mind these verses clearly suggest that the nature of
the universe is such that it is open to it  to maintain in some
other way the kind of individuality  necessary for the ﬁnal
working out of human action, even after  the disintegration
of what appears to specify his individuality  in his present
environment. What that other  way is we do not know. Nor do
we gain any further insight into  the nature of the ‘second
creation’64 by associating it with some kind of body,
however, subtle it may be. The analogies of the Qur’«n, only
suggest it as a fact; they are not meant  to reveal its nature
and character. Philosophically speaking, therefore, we
cannot go farther than this - that  in view of the past history
of man it is highly improbable that  his career should come
to an end with the dissolution of his body.

169
However, according to the teaching of the Qur’«n the ego’s
re-emergence brings him a ‘sharp sight’ (50:22) whereby he
clearly sees his self-built ‘fate fastened round his neck.’65
Heaven and Hell are states, not localities. Their descriptions
in the Qur’«n are visual representations66 of an inner fact,
i.e. character. Hell, in the words of the Qur’«n, is ‘God’s
kindled ﬁre which mounts above the hearts’67 - the painful
realization of one’s failure as a man. Heaven is the joy of
triumph over the forces of disintegration.  There is no such
thing as eternal damnation in Islam. The word ‘eternity’
used in certain verses, relating to Hell, is explained by the
Qur’«n itself to mean only a period of time  (78:23). Time
cannot be wholly irrelevant to the  development of
personality. Character tends to become permanent; its
reshaping must require time. Hell, therefore, as conceived
by the Qur’«n, is not a pit of everlasting  torture68 inﬂicted
by a revengeful God; it is a corrective experience69 which
may make a hardened ego once more sensitive to the living
breeze of Divine Grace. Nor is heaven a holiday. Life is one
and continuous. Man marches always onward to receive
ever fresh illuminations from an Inﬁnite  Reality which ‘every
moment appears in a new glory’.70 And the recipient of
Divine illumination is not merely  a passive recipient. Every
act of a free ego creates a new situation, and thus oﬀers
further opportunities  of creative unfolding.

Lecture  IV Notes:   THE HUMAN EGO - HIS FREEDOM
AND IMMORTALITY

1. Cf. Qur’«n, 6:94, 19:80 and 19:93-95; see also p. 93
where Allama Iqbal, referring to these last verses, aﬃrms
that in the life hereafter  the ﬁnite ego will  approach the
Inﬁnite Ego ‘with the irreplaceable singleness of his
individually’.

170
2. This is, in fact translation of the Quranic text:  wa l«taziru
w«zirat-unw wizra ukhr« which appears in verses 
6:164; 17:15; 35:18; 39:7 and 53:38.  Chronologically the
last verse 53:38 is the earliest on the subject.  The
implication of this supreme ethical  principle or law is three-
fold: a categorical rejection of the  Christian doctrine of the
‘original sin’, refutation  of the idea of ‘vicarious  atonement
or redemption’, and denial of the  possibility of mediation
between the sinner and God (cf. M. Asad, The Message of
the Qur’«n, p. 816, note 31).

3. Again, translation of the Quranic verse 53:39 which is in
continuation of the verse last referred  to above.

4. Cf. O. Spengler, The Decline of the West, I, 306-07. Also
Lecture V, p. 114 where Allama Iqbal makes the important
statement: ‘Indeed my  main purpose in these lectures has
been to secure a vision of the spirit of Islam as emancipated
from its Magian overlayings’ (italics mine).  This may be read
in conjunction with Allama’s reply  to a Parsi gentleman’s
letter published in Statesman. This reply makes it clear that:
‘Magian thought and religious experience very much
permeate Muslim theology, philosophy and Suﬁsm. Indeed,
there is evidence to show that certain  schools of Suﬁsm
known as Islamic have only repeated the Magian type of
religious experience . . . . There is deﬁnite evidence in the
Qur’«n itself to show that Islam aimed at  opening up new
channels not only of thought but  the religious experience as
well. Our Magian inheritance, however, has stiﬂed the life of
Islam and never allowed the development of its real  spirit
and aspirations’ (Speeches, Writings and Statements of
Iqbal, ed. A.L. Sherwani, p. 170). It is important to note that,
according to Allama Iqbal, Bahaism and Qadianism are ‘the
two forms which the modern revival  of pre-Islamic
Magianism has assumed’, cf. his article ‘Qadianis and
Orthodox Muslims’, ibid., p. 162. This is reiterated in

171
‘Introduction to the  Study of Islam’, a highly valuable
synopsis of a book that Allama contemplated to write.  Under
section ‘E’ Sub-section (iii) one of the topics of this proposed
book is: ‘Babi, Ahmadiyya, etc. Prophecies. All More or Less
Magian’ (Letters and Writings of Iqbal, p. 93; italics mine).
Earlier on pp. 87-88 there is an enlightening passage which
reads: ‘Empire brought men belonging to earlier ascetic
cultures, which Spengler describes as Magian, within the
fold of Islam. The result was the conversion of Islam to a
pre-Islamic creed with all the philosophical controversies of
these creeds: Rëh, Nafs; Qur’«n; Àadâth or Qadâm. Real
Islam had very little chances.’ This may be compared with
Allama’s impassioned statement in his article: ‘Islam and
Mysticism’ (Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal, p.
122): ‘The Moslems of Spain, with their Aristotelian spirit,
and away from the enervating inﬂuences of the  thought of
Western and Central Asia, were comparatively much closer
to the spirit of Islam than the  Moslem races of Asia, who let
Arabian Islam pass through all the solvents of Ajam and
ﬁnally divested it of its  original character. The conquest of
Persia meant not the conversion of Persia to Islam, but the
conversion of Islam to Persianism. Read the intellectual
history of the Moslems of Western and Central Asia from the
10th century downwards, and you will ﬁnd therein  veriﬁed
every word that I have written  above.’ And Allama Iqbal
wrote this, be it noted, in July 1917, i.e. before Spengler’s
magnum opus: The Decline of the West was published (Vol.
I, 1918, revised 1923, Vol. II, 1922; English translation, Vol. I,
23 April 1926, Vol. II, 9 November 1928) and before the
expressions such as ‘Magian Soul’, ‘Magian Culture’ and
‘Magian Religion’ came to be used by the philosophers of
history and culture.

5. Cf. the Quranic verses 41:53 and 51:20-21, which make it
incumbent on men to study signs of God in themselves as
much as those in the world around them.

172
6. Cf. Husain b. Mansër al-Àall«j, Kit«b al-ñaw«sân, English
translation by Aisha Abd Ar-Rahman, also by Gilani Kamran,
(Ana al-Haqq Reconsidered, pp. 55-108), ñ«sân VI, 23,
containing al-Àall«j’s ecstatic utterance: an« al-Haqq, and L.
Massignon’s explanatory notes on it translated by R.A.
Butler in his article ‘Kit«b alTaw«sân of al-Hall«j’ Journal of
the University of Baluchistan, 1/2 (Autumn 1981),  79-85; cf.
also A. Schimmel, Mystical Dimensions of Islam, pp. 66 ﬀ.

It may be noted that  Allama Iqbal in his, in many ways very
valuable, article ‘McTaggart’s Philosophy’ (Speeches,
Writings and Statements of Iqbal, pp. 143-51), compares
McTaggart to Àall«j (pp. 148-49). In the system of this
‘philosopher-saint’, ‘mystical  intuition, as a source of
knowledge, is much more marked than in the system of
Bradley . . . . In the case of McTaggart the mystic Reality
came to him as a conﬁrmation of his thought  . . . . When the
mystic Sultan Abë Sa‘id met the philosopher Abë ‘Alâ ibn
Sân«, he is reported to have said, ‘I see what he knows.’
McTaggart both knew and saw’ (pp. 145-46). The key to
McTaggart’s system indeed, is his mysticism as is borne out
from the concluding sentence of his ﬁrst work  Studies in the
Hegelian Dialectic: ‘All true philosophy must be mystical,
not indeed in its methods, but  in its ﬁnal conclusions.’

This in-depth article on ‘McTaggart’s Philosophy’ also
contains Allama Iqbal’s own translation of two passages
from his poem The New Garden of Mystery (Gulshan-i R«z-i
Jadâd) dealing with Questions VI and VIII; the latter Question
probes into the mystery of Àall«j’s ecstatic  utterance: ‘I am
the Truth’. Cf. B.A. Dar (tr.), Iqbal’s Gulshan-i R«z-i Jadâd and
Bandagâ N«mah, pp. 42-43, 51-54.

7. Cf. The Muqaddimah, trans. F. Rosenthal, II, 76-103.

173
8. Note Iqb«l signiﬁcant observation that  ‘modern
psychology has not yet touched even the outer  fringe of
religious life and is still far from  the richness and variety of
what is called religious experience’ (Lecture VII, p. 
152).

9. Cf. Ethical Studies (1876), pp. 80 f.
 10. Cf. The Principles of Logic (1883), Vol. II, chapter ii.
 11. Cf. Appearance and Reality (1893), pp. 90-103.
 12. Jâv«tm« is the individual mind or consciousness of man
or his soul distinguished from the cosmic mind, cosmic
consciousness or world-soul; cf. ‘Atman’, Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics, II,195, also XII, 597.
 13. Cf. Appearance and Reality, p. 89; also ‘Appendix’, p.
497. 14. Misprinted as, mutual, states in the previous
editions.
 15. For Ghaz«lâ’s concept;ion of the soul, cf. M. Saeed
Sheikh, ‘Al-Ghaz«lâ: Mysticism’, A History of Muslim
Philosophy, ed. M.M. Sharif, I, 619-21.

16. Reference here is to what Kant named ‘Paralogisms of
Pure Reason’, i.e. fallacious arguments which allege to prove
substantiality, simplicity,  numerical identity  and eternality
of the human soul; cf. Critique of Pure Reason, pp. 328-83.

17. Ibid., pp. 329-30.

18. Ibid., pp. 372-73; this is, in fact, Kant’s argument  in
refutation of the  German Jewish philosopher Moses
Mendelssohn’s ‘Proof of the Permanence of the Soul’; cf.
Kemp Smith, Commentary to Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason,
pp. 470-71.

19. Cf. Principles of Psychology, Vol. I, chapter ix, especially
pp. 237-48.
 20. Ibid., p. 340.

174
21. Ibid., p. 339; cf. Critique of Pure Reason, p. 342, note (a)
where Kant gives an illustration of a series of elastic balls in
connection with the third  paralogism to establish the
numerical identity  of the ego. Kemp Smith in his
Commentary p. 461, has rightly observed that  William
James’s psychological description of selfconsciousness is
simply an extension of this illustration.

22. Qur’«n, 7:54.

23. Cf. pp. 84-85, where Allama Iqbal gives a philosophical
answer to this question in terms of contemporary  theory of
emergent evolution as expounded by S. Alexander (Space,
Time and Deity, 2 vols., 1920) and C.L. Morgan (Emergent
Evolution, 1923). The theory distinguishes between two
kinds of eﬀects: ‘resultants’  which are the predictable
outcome of previously existing conditions and ‘emergents’
which are speciﬁcally new and not completely predictable.
According to Alexander, who in his original conception of
emergence was indebted to Morgan (cf. Space, Time and
Deity, II, 14), mind is ‘an ‘emergent’  from life, and life  an
emergent from a lower physico-chemical level of existence’
(ibid.). When physico-chemical processes attain a certain
degree of Gestaltlike structural complexity  life emerges out
of it. Life is not an epiphenomenon, nor is it an entelechy  as
with Hans Driesch but an ‘emergent’ - there  is no cleft
between life and matter. At the  next stage of
‘conﬁgurations’ when neural  processes in living organisms
attain a certain level  of structural complexity,  mind appears
as a novel emergent. By reasonable extrapolation it may be
assumed that there are emergents (or ‘qualities’)  higher
than mind.

This is very close to Maul«n« Rëmâ’s ‘biological future of
man’, ‘Abd al-Karâm al-Jâlâ’s ‘Perfect Man’ and Nietzsche’s
‘Superman’. No wonder that Allama Iqbal in his letter  dated

175
24 January 1921 to R.A. Nicholson (Letters of Iqbal, pp. 141-
42), while taking a strict  notice of E.M. Forster’s review of
The Secrets of the Self (translation of his epoch-making
Asr«r-i Khudâ) and particularly of the Nietzschean allegation
against him (cf. Forster’s review in Dr Riﬀat Hassan, The
Sword and the Sceptre, p. 284) writes: ‘Nor does he rightly
understand my idea of the Perfect Man which he confounds
with the German thinker’s Superman. I wrote on the Suﬁ
doctrine of the Perfect Man more than twenty years ago,
long before I had read or heard anything of Nietzsche . . . .
The English reader ought to approach this idea, not through
the German thinker, but through  an English thinker of great
merit (italics mine)  - I mean Alexander - whose Giﬀord
Lectures (1916-18) delivered at Glasgow were published last
year.’ This is followed by a quotation from Alexander’s
chapter on ‘Deity and God’ (op. cit., II, 347, II, 1-8) ending in
a signiﬁcant admission: ‘Alexander’s thought is much bolder
than mine (italics mine).

24. More generally known as James-Lange theory of
emotions. This theory was propounded by the Danish
physician and psychologist, Carl George Lange in a
pamphlet Om Sindsbevaegelser in 1885, while William
James had already set forth similar views in an article
published in Mind in 1884. For a full statement of the  theory,
see William James, Principles of Psychology, II, 449 ﬀ. and
for its refutation  (as hinted at by Allama Iqbal),
Encyclopaedia Britanica, s.v., XII, 885-86.
25. For Iqbal’s very clear and deﬁnitive verdict  of body-mind
dualism, cf. Lecture VI, p. 122.

26. Reference is to the Quranic verse (7:54) quoted on p.
82.
 27. Cf. Lecture II, p. 28.
 28. Qur’«n, 57:3.
 29. Cf. William James, op. cit., II, 549.

176
30. More generally known as Gestalt Psychology, this
German school of psychology was the result of the
combined work of M. Wertheimer, K. Koﬀka and W. Kö hler
during 1912-14. It came as a reaction against the psychic
elements of analytic or associationistic psychology, insisting
upon the concept of gestalt, conﬁguration,  or organized
whole which, if analyzed, it was averred, would lose its
distinctive quality. Thus it is impossible to consider the
phenomenon of perception as in any way made up of a
number of isolable elements, sensory or of any other origin,
for what we perceive are ‘forms’, ‘shapes’  or
‘conﬁgurations’. From ‘perception’  the gestaltprinciple has
been extended throughout psychology and into biology  and
physics. Important for Iqbal scholars are the suggestions
recently made to discern some ‘points of contact’  between
the Gestalt and the philosophies of J. C. Smuts (holism) and
A.N. Whitehead (philosophy of organism); cf. K. Koﬀka,
‘Gestalt’, Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, VI, 642-46;
also J. C. Smuts, ‘Holism’, Encyclopaedia Britannica, XI, 643.

31. The concept of ‘insight’ was ﬁrst elaborately  expounded
by W. Kö hler in his famous work: The Mentality of Apes (ﬁrst
English translation in 1924 of his Intelligerprufü  ngen an
Menschenaﬀen, 1917); cf. C.S. Peyser, ‘Kohler, Wolfgang
(1887-1967)’, Encyclopedia of Psychology, II, 271.

32. In the history of Islamic thought,  this is one of the ﬁnest
arguments to resolve the age-long controversy between
determinism and indeterminism  and to establish the
soundest basis for self-determinism.

33. Cf. The Decline of the West, II, 240, where Spengler
says: ‘But it is precisely the impossibility  of an Ego as a free
power in the face of the divine that  constitutes Islam. (italics
by Spengler); earlier on p. 235 speaking of Magian religions
(and for him Islam is one of them) Spengler observes: ‘the

177
impossibility of a thinking,  believing, and knowing Ego is the
presupposition inherent in all the fundamentals  of all these
religions’.

34. Cf. Lecture II, p. 40.
 35. Cf. Introduction to the Secrets of the Self (English
translation of Allama Iqbal’s ‘philosophical poem’:  Asr«ri
Khudâ), pp. xviii-xix.
 36. See Ibn Qutaibah, Kit«b al-Ma‘«rif, ed. ‘Ukashah, p. 441;
cf. also Obermann, ‘Political Theology in Early Islam’: Àasan
al-Basrâ’s Treatise on qadar’, Journal of the American
Oriental Society, LV (1935), 138-62.

37. Cf. D. B. Macdonald, Development of Muslim Theology,
pp. 123-24, for a brief mention of  ‘the origin of the  theory of
the accomplished fact’ with  reference to the political
attitude of the  Murjâ‘ites, and Khuda Bukhsh, Politics in
Islam, p. 150, for Ibn Jam«’ah’s view on the subject as
contained in his work on constitutional  law of Islam: TaÁrâr
al-Ahk«m fâ Tadbâr Ahl al-Isl«m (ed. Hans Koﬂer), p. 357. It
may be added that Allama Iqbal did take notice of  Ibn
Jama`’ah’s view (of bai‘ah through force) and observed:
‘This opportunist view has no support in the law  of Islam’: cf.
his article ‘Political Thought in Islam’ Sociological Review, I
(1908), 256, II, 15-16; reproduced in Speeches, Writings and
Statements of Iqbal, ed. A. L. Sherwani, p. 115.

38. Cf. Renan, Averrö es et l’averroisme (pp. 136f.) as
quoted in R.A. Tsanoﬀ, The Problem of Immortality, p. 76.
 39. Cf. William James, Human Immortality, p. 32.
 40. Ibid., p. 28.
 41. Ibid., p. 29. 42. Cf. Lecture II, pp. 26-28; also p. 83.
 43. This passage in its entire import seems to be quite close
to the one quoted from Eddington’s widely  read Nature of
the Physical World (p. 323) in Lecture VII, p. 147.
 

178
44. Cf. R. A. Tsanoﬀ, op. cit., pp. 143-78, for a commendable
account of Nietzsche’s doctrine of Eternal Recurrence.
 45. Cf. H. Spencer, First Principles, pp. 549 ﬀ.
 46. Cf. Tsanoﬀ, op. cit., pp. 162-63.
 47. Cf. Oscar Levy (ed.), Complete Works of Friedrich
Nietzsche, XIV, 248 and 250, quoted in Tsanoﬀ, op. cit., p.
163.
 48. Cf. Levy, op. cit., XVI, 274, and Tsanoﬀ, op. cit., p. 177.

49. Cf. Lecture V, p. 113 where Iqbal says: ‘Whatever may
be the criterion by which to  judge the forward steps of
creative movement, the  movement itself, if conceived as
cyclic, ceases to be creative. Eternal recurrence is not
eternal creation, it is eternal  repetition’.

50. Barzakh, according to Lane’s Arabic-English Lexicon,
means ‘a thing that  intervenes between any two things, or a
bar, an obstruction, or a thing that  makes a separation
between two things’. As signifying the  state between death
and resurrection the word barzakh occurs in the Qur’«n,
23:99-100.

51. Reference is to the Quranic verses 23:12-14 quoted on
p. 83.
 52. See also verses 6:94 and 19:80.
 53. Translation of the Quranic expression ajr-un ghairu
mamnun-in found in verses 41:8; 84:25 and 95:6.
 54. Reference here is among others to the Quranic verses
69:13-18; 77:8-11.
 55. Cf. also the Quranic verses 20:112; 21:103; 101:6-7.

56. This alludes to the diﬀerence of the Prophet’s encounter
with God as stated in the Quranic verse 53:17 from that  of
Prophet Moses’ as given in verses 7:143. Referring to the
Persian verse (ascribed by some to the Sufâ poet Jam«lâ of
Delhi who died in 942/1535), Iqbal in his letter  to Dr Hadi

179
Hasan of Aligarh Muslim University observes: ‘In the whole
range of Muslim literature there  is not one verse like it and
these two lines enclose a whole inﬁnitude of ideas’. See B.A.
Dar (ed.), Letters and Writings of Iqbal, pp. 2-3.

57. So important is ‘action’ or  ‘deed’ according to the
Qur’«n that there are more than  one hundred verses urging
the believers to act righteously  - hence, the opening line of
Allama Iqbal’s Preface to the Lectures; see M. Fu‘«d ‘Abd al-
B«qâ’s al-Mu‘jam al-Mufahras li Alf«z al-Qur’«n al Karâm,
verses under the radicals: ml, slh and hsn.

58. This, according to Helmholtz, one of the greatest
scientists of the nineteenth  century, was about thirty  metres
per second. Before Helmholtz the conduction of neural
impulse was thought to be instantaneous, too fast  to be
measured. After he had demonstrated its measurement
through his experimental studies; his researches came to be
used in experiments on reaction time (cf. Gardner Murphy,
Historical Introduction to Modern Psychology, p. 138 and N.
A. Haynie’s article: ‘Helmholtz, Hermann von (1821-1894)’
in Encyclopedia of Psychology, II, 103. Allama Iqbal’s
Hypothetical statement  with reference to Helmholtz’s
discovery: ‘If this is so, our present physiological structure is
at the bottom  of our present view of time’  is highly
suggestive of new physiological or biological studies of time.
It is to be noted that  some useful research in this direction
seems to have been undertaken already; cf. articles: ‘Time’
and ‘Time Perception’ in The New Encyclopaedia Britannica
(Macropaedia), XVIII, 420-22.
59. See George Sarton, Introduction to the History of
Science, I, 597, where it is said that the Kit«b al-Hayaw«n of
al-J«Áiï contains the germs of many later theories: evolution
adaptation, animal psychology. Cf. also M. Plessner, ‘Al-J«Áiï’
in Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, VII, 63-65.

180
60. For a statement of the views of ‘Brethren of Purity’ with
regard to the hypothesis of evolution, cf. Seyyed Hossein
Nasr, An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, pp.
72-74.

61. See Lecture V, p. 107, for Ibn Maskawaih’s very clear
conception of biological evolution, which later found
expression in the ‘inimitable lines’ of  ‘the excellent Rëmâ’
quoted in the next passage as well as in Lecture VII, pp.
147-48.

62. Cf. E. H. Whinﬁeld (tr.), Masnavi, pp. 216-17; this is
translation of verses 3637-41 and 3646-48 of Book iv of
Rëmâ’ s Mathnawâ- cf. Allama Iqbal’s observation on these
verses in his Development of Metaphysics in Persia, p. 91.

63. For the keeping of a book or record of whatever man
does in life here, there is repeated mention in the  Qur’a`n;
see, for example, verses 18:49; 21:94; 43:80 and 45:29.
 64. Reference seems here to be to the Quranic verse 29:20
though ‘second creation’ is also alluded to in such verses as
10:4; 27:64; 30:11. See also 56:61.
 65. Qur’«n, 17:13.

66. Reference here is to the Quranic description of life
hereafter such as is to be found in verses 37:41-49 and 
44:51-55 for the state of life  promised to the righteous, and
37:62-68 and 44:43-49 for the kind of life  to be suﬀered by
the wicked. See also 32:17.

67. Qur’«n, 104:6-7.
 68. Reference is to the Quranic expression h«wâyah (for
hell) in 101:9.
 69. See the Quranic verse 57:15 where the ﬁre of hell is
spoken of as man’s friend (maul«), i.e. ‘the only thing  by

181
which he may hope to be puriﬁed and redeemed’ (cf. M.
Asad, The Message of the Qur’«n, p. 838, note 21).
 70. Qur’«n, 55:29.
 Home The Spirit   of Muslim   Culture
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal

‘Muhammad of Arabia ascended the highest Heaven and
returned. I swear by God that if I had reached that point,  I
should never have returned.’1 These are the words of a
great Muslim saint, ‘AbdulQuddës of Gangoh. In the whole
range of Suﬁ literature it  will be probably diﬃcult  to ﬁnd
words which, in a single sentence, disclose such an acute
perception of the psychological diﬀerence between the
prophetic and the mystic types  of consciousness. The mystic
does not wish to return from the  repose of ‘unitary
experience’; and even when he does return, as he must, his
return does not mean much for mankind at  large. The
prophet’s return is creative. He returns to  insert himself into
the sweep of time with a view  to control the forces of
history, and thereby to create  a fresh world of ideals. For the
mystic the repose of ‘unitary  experience’ is something ﬁnal;
for the prophet it  is the awakening, within him, of world-
shaking psychological forces, calculated to completely
transform the human world. The desire to see his religious
experience transformed into a living  world-force is supreme
in the prophet. Thus his return amounts to a kind  of
pragmatic test of the  value of his religious experience. In its
creative act the prophet’s  will judges both itself and the
world of concrete fact in which it  endeavours to objectify
itself. In penetrating the  impervious material before him the
prophet discovers himself for himself, and unveils himself  to
the eye of history. Another way of judging the value of  a
prophet’s religious experience, therefore, would be to
examine the type of manhood that  he has created, and the
cultural world that  has sprung out of the spirit of  his
message. In this lecture I want to conﬁne myself to  the

182
latter alone. The idea is not to give you a description of the
achievements of Islam in the domain of knowledge. I want
rather to ﬁx your gaze on some of the ruling  concepts of the
culture of Islam in order to gain an insight into  the process
of ideation that underlies them,  and thus to catch a glimpse
of the soul that found expression through them.  Before,
however, I proceed to do so it is necessary to understand
the cultural value of a great idea in  Islam - I mean the
ﬁnality of the institution  of prophethood.2

A prophet may be deﬁned as a type of mystic consciousness
in which ‘unitary experience’  tends to overﬂow its
boundaries, and seeks opportunities of redirecting or
refashioning the forces of collective life. In his personality
the ﬁnite centre of life  sinks into his own inﬁnite depths only
to spring up again, with fresh vigour, to  destroy the old, and
to disclose the new directions of life. This contact with the
root of his own being is by no means peculiar to man.
Indeed the way in which the word WaÁâ (inspiration) is used
in the Qur’«n shows that the Qur’«n regards it as a universal
property of life;3 though its nature and character  are
diﬀerent at diﬀerent  stages of the evolution of life.  The plant
growing freely in space, the animal developing a new organ
to suit a new environment, and a human being receiving
light from the inner  depths of life, are all cases of inspiration
varying in character according to the needs of the  recipient,
or the needs of the species to which the recipient belongs.
Now during the minority of mankind  psychic energy
develops what I call prophetic consciousness - a mode of
economizing individual thought and choice by providing
ready-made judgements, choices, and ways of action. With
the birth of reason and critical faculty,  however, life, in its
own interest, inhibits the formation  and growth of non-
rational modes of consciousness through which psychic
energy ﬂowed at an earlier stage of human evolution.  Man
is primarily governed by passion and instinct. Inductive

183
reason, which alone makes man master of his environment,
is an achievement; and when once born it must be
reinforced by inhibiting the  growth of other modes of
knowledge. There is no doubt that the ancient world
produced some great systems of philosophy at a time when
man was comparatively primitive  and governed more or less
by suggestion. But we must not forget that  this system-
building in the ancient world was the work  of abstract
thought which cannot go beyond the systematization  of
vague religious beliefs and traditions, and gives us no hold
on the concrete situations of life.

Looking at the matter from this  point of view, then, the
Prophet of Islam seems to stand between the ancient and
the modern world. In so far as the source of his revelation is
concerned he belongs to the ancient world; in so far as the
spirit of his revelation is concerned he belongs to the
modern world. In him life discovers other sources of
knowledge suitable to its new direction. The birth  of Islam,
as I hope to be able presently to prove to your satisfaction,
is the birth of inductive  intellect. In Islam prophecy reaches
its perfection in discovering the need of its  own abolition.4
This involves the keen perception that life cannot for  ever
be kept in leading strings; that, in  order to achieve full self-
consciousness, man must ﬁnally be thrown back on his own
resources. The abolition of priesthood and hereditary
kingship in Islam, the constant appeal to reason and
experience in the Qur’«n, and the emphasis that it  lays on
Nature and History as sources of human knowledge, are all
diﬀerent aspects of the same idea of ﬁnality. The idea,
however, does not mean that mystic experience, which
qualitatively does not diﬀer  from the experience of the
prophet, has now ceased to exist as a vital fact. Indeed the
Qur’«n regards both Anfus (self) and ÿf«q (world) as sources
of knowledge.5 God reveals His signs in inner as well as
outer experience, and it is the duty  of man to judge the

184
knowledge-yielding capacity of all aspects of experience.
The idea of ﬁnality, therefore, should not be taken to
suggest that the ultimate  fate of life is complete
displacement of emotion by reason. Such a thing is neither
possible nor desirable. The intellectual value of the idea is
that it tends to  create an independent critical attitude
towards mystic experience by generating the belief  that all
personal authority, claiming a supernatural  origin, has come
to an end in the history of man. This kind of belief is a
psychological force which inhibits the growth of such
authority. The function of the idea is to open up fresh vistas
of knowledge in the domain of man’s inner experience. Just
as the ﬁrst half of the formula  of Islam6 has created and
fostered the spirit of a critical  observation of man’s outer
experience by divesting the forces of nature of that  Divine
character with which earlier cultures  had clothed them.
Mystic experience, then, however unusual and abnormal,
must now be regarded by a Muslim as a perfectly natural
experience, open to critical scrutiny like other  aspects of
human experience. This is clear from the Prophet’s own
attitude towards Ibn Âayy«d’s psychic experiences.7 The
function of Suﬁsm in Islam has been to systematize mystic
experience; though it must be admitted  that Ibn Khaldën
was the only Muslim who approached it in a thoroughly
scientiﬁc spirit.8

But inner experience is only one source of human
knowledge. According to the Qur’«n, there are two other
sources of knowledge - Nature and History; and it is in
tapping these sources of knowledge that the spirit  of Islam
is seen at its best. The Qur’«n sees signs of the Ultimate
Reality in the ‘sun’, the ‘moon’,  ‘the lengthening out  of
shadows’, ‘the alternation of day and night’,  ‘the variety  of
human colours and tongues’,10 ‘the alternation  of the days
of success and reverse among peoples’ - in fact in the whole

185
of Nature as revealed to the senseperception of man. And
the Muslim’s duty is to reﬂect on these signs and not to  pass
by them ‘as if he is dead and blind’, for he ‘who  does not
see these signs in this life will remain blind to the  realities of
the life to come’.9 This appeal to the concrete combined
with the slow realization that,  according to the teachings of
the Qur’«n, the universe is dynamic in its origin,  ﬁnite and
capable of increase, eventually brought Muslim thinkers into
conﬂict with Greek thought which, in the  beginning of their
intellectual career, they had studied  with so much
enthusiasm. Not realizing that the spirit  of the Qur’«n was
essentially anti-classical, and putting full  conﬁdence in
Greek thinkers, their ﬁrst impulse was to understand the
Qur’«n in the light of Greek philosophy. In view of the
concrete spirit of the Qur’«n, and the speculative  nature of
Greek philosophy which enjoyed theory and was neglectful
of fact, this attempt  was foredoomed to failure. And it is
what follows their failure that  brings out the real spirit  of the
culture of Islam, and lays the foundation of modern culture
in some of its most important  aspects.

This intellectual revolt against Greek philosophy manifests
itself in all departments of  thought. I am afraid I am not
competent enough to deal with it  as it discloses itself in
Mathematics, Astronomy, and Medicine. It is clearly visible
in the metaphysical thought  of the Ash‘arite, but appears as
a most well-deﬁned phenomenon in the Muslim criticism of
Greek Logic. This was only natural; for dissatisfaction with
purely speculative philosophy means the search for a surer
method of knowledge. It was, I think, Naïï«m who ﬁrst
formulated the principle of  ‘doubt’ as the beginning of all
knowledge. Ghazz«lâ further ampliﬁed it in his
‘Reviviﬁcation of the Sciences of Religion’,10 and prepared
the way for ‘Descartes’ Method’. But Ghazz«lâ remained on
the whole a follower of Aristotle in Logic. In his Qist«s he
puts some of the Quranic arguments in the form of

186
Aristotelian ﬁgures,11 but forgets the Quranic Sërah known
as Shu’ar«’ where the proposition that retribution  follows
the gainsaying of prophets is established by the method  of
simple enumeration of historical  instances. It was
Ishr«qâand Ibn Taimâyyah who undertook a systematic
refutation of Greek Logic.12 Abë Bakr R«zâ was perhaps the
ﬁrst to criticize  Aristotle’s ﬁrst ﬁgure,13 and in our own times
his objection, conceived in a thoroughly inductive  spirit, has
been reformulated by John Stuart Mill. Ibn Àazm, in his
‘Scope of Logic’,14 emphasizes sense-perception as a source
of knowledge; and Ibn Taimâyyah in his ‘Refutation of Logic’,
shows that induction is the only form  of reliable argument.
Thus arose the method of observation and experiment. It
was not a merely theoretical aﬀair. Al-Bârënâ’s discovery of
what we call reaction-time and al-Kindâ’s discovery that
sensation is proportionate to the stimulus,  are instances of
its application in psychology.15 It is a mistake to suppose
that the experimental  method is a European discovery. Dü
hring tells us that Roger Bacon’s conceptions of science are
more just and clear than those of his celebrated namesake.
And where did Roger Bacon receive his scientiﬁc training? -
In the Muslim universities of Spain. Indeed Part V of his Opus
Majus which is devoted to ‘Perspective’ is practically a copy
of Ibn Haitham’s Optics.16 Nor is the book, as a whole,
lacking in evidences of Ibn Hazm’s inﬂuence on its author.17
Europe has been rather slow to recognize the Islamic origin
of her scientiﬁc method. But full  recognition of the fact  has
at last come. Let me quote one or two passages from
Briﬀault’s Making of Humanity,

‘. . . it was under their  successors at that Oxford school that
Roger Bacon learned Arabic and Arabic science. Neither
Roger Bacon nor his later namesake has any title to be
credited with having introduced  the experimental method.
Roger Bacon was no more than one of the apostles of

187
Muslim science and method to Christian Europe; and he
never wearied of declaring that a knowledge of Arabic and
Arabian science was for his contemporaries the only way to
true knowledge. Discussions as to who was the originator of
the experimental method . . .  are part of the colossal
misrepresentation of the origins of European civilization. The
experimental method of the Arabs was by Bacon’s time
widespread and eagerly cultivated throughout  Europe’ (pp.
200-01). . . .

‘Science is the most momentous contribution of Arab
civilization to the modern world,  but its fruits were slow in
ripening. Not until long after  Moorish culture had sunk back
into darkness did the giant to which it  had given birth rise in
his might. It was not science which brought Europe back to
life. Other and manifold inﬂuences from the civilization  of
Islam communicated its ﬁrst glow to European life’  (p. 202).

‘For although there is not a single aspect of European
growth in which the decisive inﬂuence of Islamic culture  is
not traceable, nowhere is it so clear and momentous as in
the genesis of that power which constitutes the  paramount
distinctive force of the modern world,  and the supreme
source of its victory - natural science and the scientiﬁc
spirit’ (p. 190).

‘The debt of our science to that of the Arabs does not
consist in startling discoveries or revolutionary  theories;
science owes a great deal more to Arab culture, it owes its
existence. The ancient world was, as we saw, pre-scientiﬁc.
The astronomy and mathematics of the Greek were a
foreign importation never thoroughly  acclimatized in Greek
culture. The Greeks systematized, generalized, and
theorized, but the patient  ways of investigation, the
accumulation of positive knowledge, the minute  methods of
science, detailed and prolonged observation, experimental

188
inquiry, were altogether alien to  the Greek temperament.
Only in Hellenistic Alexandria was any approach to scientiﬁc
work conducted in the ancient classical world. What we call
science arose in Europe as a result of a new spirit of inquiry,
of new methods of investigation, of the  method of
experiment, observation, measurement, of the  development
of mathematics in a form unknown to the  Greeks. That spirit
and those methods were introduced into the European world
by the Arabs’ (p. 191).

The ﬁrst important point  to note about the spirit  of Muslim
culture then is that, for  purposes of knowledge, it ﬁxes its
gaze on the concrete, the ﬁnite. It is further  clear that the
birth of the method  of observation and experiment in Islam
was due not to a compromise with Greek thought but to  a
prolonged intellectual warfare with  it. In fact, the inﬂuence
of the Greeks who, as Briﬀault says, were interested chieﬂy
in theory, not in fact, tended  rather to obscure the Muslims’
vision of the Qur’«n, and for at least two centuries  kept the
practical Arab temperament from asserting  itself and
coming to its own. I want, therefore, deﬁnitely  to eradicate
the misunderstanding that Greek thought,  in any way,
determined the character of Muslim culture.  Part of my
argument you have seen; part you will see presently.

Knowledge must begin with the concrete. It is the
intellectual capture of and power over the  concrete that
makes it possible for the intellect of man to  pass beyond the
concrete. As the Qur’«n says:

‘O company of djinn and men, if you can overpass the
bounds of the heaven and the earth, then overpass them.
But by power alone shall ye overpass them’ (55:33).

But the universe, as a collection of ﬁnite things,  presents
itself as a kind of island situated in a pure vacuity  to which

189
time, regarded as a series of mutually exclusive moments, is
nothing and does nothing. Such a vision of the universe
leads the reﬂecting mind nowhere. The thought of a limit  to
perceptual space and time staggers the mind. The ﬁnite, as
such, is an idol obstructing the movement of the  mind; or, in
order to overpass its bounds, the mind must overcome
serial time and the pure vacuity  of perceptual space. ‘And
verily towards thy God is the limit’,  says the Qur’«n.18 This
verse embodies one of the deepest thoughts in the Qur’«n;
for it deﬁnitely  suggests that the ultimate  limit is to be
sought not in the direction of stars, but  in an inﬁnite cosmic
life and spirituality. Now the intellectual  journey towards this
ultimate limit  is long and arduous; and in this eﬀort, too,  the
thought of Islam appears to have moved in a direction
entirely diﬀerent  to the Greeks. The ideal of the Greeks, as
Spengler tells us, was proportion, not inﬁnity. The physical
presentness of the ﬁnite with its  well-deﬁned limits alone
absorbed the mind of the Greeks. In the history of Muslim
culture, on the other hand, we ﬁnd that  both in the realms
of pure intellect and religious psychology, by which term  I
mean higher Suﬁsm, the ideal revealed is the possession
and enjoyment of the Inﬁnite.  In a culture, with such an
attitude, the problem  of space and time becomes a question
of life and death. In one of these lectures I have already
given you some idea of the way in which the problem of
time and space presented itself to Muslim thinkers,
especially the Ash‘arite. One reason why the atomism of
Democritus never became popular in the world of Islam is
that it involves the  assumption of an absolute space. The
Ash‘arite were, therefore, driven to develop a diﬀerent  kind
of atomism, and tried to overcome the  diﬃculties of
perceptual space in a manner similar to modern atomism.
On the side of Mathematics it must be remembered that
since the days of Ptolemy (A.D. 87-165) till the time of
NaÄâr ñësâ (A.D. 120-74)nobody gave serious thought to

190
the diﬃculties of demonstrating  the certitude  of Euclid’s
parallel postulate on the basis of perceptual space.19 It was
ñësâ who ﬁrst disturbed the calm which had prevailed in  the
world of Mathematics for a thousand years; and in his eﬀort
to improve the postulate realized the  necessity of
abandoning perceptual space. He thus furnished a basis,
however slight, for the hyperspace movement of  our time.20
It was, however, al-Bârënâ who, in his approach to the
modern mathematical idea of function  saw, from a purely
scientiﬁc point of view, the  insuﬃciency of a static view of
the universe. This again is a clear departure from the Greek
view. The function-idea introduces the element of time in
our world-picture. It turns the  ﬁxed into the variable, and
sees the universe not as being but as becoming. Spengler
thinks that the mathematical  idea of function is the  symbol
of the West of which ‘no other culture gives even a hint’.21
In view of al-Bârënâ, generalizing Newton’s formula of
interpolation from trignometrical  function  to any function
whatever.22 Spengler’s claim has no foundation in fact. The
transformation of the Greek concept of number from  pure
magnitude to pure relation really  began with Khw«rizmâs
movement from Arithmetic  to Algebra.23 alBârënâ took a
deﬁnite step forward towards what Spengler describes as
chronological number which signiﬁes the mind’s passage
from being to becoming. Indeed, more recent developments
in European mathematics tend rather to deprive  time of its
living historical character, and to  reduce it to a mere
representation of space. That is why Whitehead’s view of
Relativity is likely to appeal to Muslim students more than
that of Einstein in whose theory time loses its character  of
passage and mysteriously translates itself into utter
space.24a

Side by side with the progress of mathematical thought  in
Islam we ﬁnd the idea of evolution gradually  shaping itself.

191
It was Ja`hiz who was the ﬁrst to note the changes in bird-
life caused by migrations. Later Ibn Maskawaih who was a
contemporary of al-Bârënâ gave it the shape of a more
deﬁnite theory, and adopted  it in his theological work - al-
Fauz al-Asghar. I reproduce here the substance of his
evolutionary hypothesis, not because of its scientiﬁc  value,
but because of the light which it  throws on the direction in
which Muslim thought was moving.

According to Ibn Maskawaih plant-life at the lowest stage of
evolution does not need any seed for its birth  and growth.
Nor does it perpetuate its species by means of the seed.
This kind of plant-life diﬀers from  minerals only in some little
power of movement which grows in higher forms, and
reveals itself further in  that the plant  spreads out its
branches, and perpetuates its species by means of the
seed. The power of movement gradually grows farther until
we reach trees which possess a trunk, leaves, and fruit. At a
higher stage of evolution stand forms of  plant-life which
need better soil and climate for  their growth. The last stage
of development is reached in vine and date-palm which
stand, as it were, on the threshold of animal life.  In the date-
palm a clear sex-distinction appears. Besides roots and
ﬁbres it develops something which functions like  the animal
brain, on the integrity  of which depends the life of the
datepalm. This is the highest stage in the development  of
plant-life, and a prelude to animal  life. The ﬁrst forward step
towards animal life is freedom from earth-rootedness which
is the germ of conscious movement. This is the initial state
of animality in which the  sense of touch is the ﬁrst, and the
sense of sight is the last to appear. With the development of
the senses of animal acquires freedom of movement, as in
the case of worms, reptiles, ants, and bees. Animality
reaches its perfection in the horse among quadrupeds and
the falcon among birds, and ﬁnally arrives at  the frontier of
humanity in the ape which is just  a degree below man in the

192
scale of evolution. Further evolution brings physiological
changes with a growing power of discrimination and
spirituality until  humanity passes from barbarism to
civilization.24b

But it is really religious psychology, as in ‘Ir«qâand Khw«jah
Muhammad P«rs«,25 which brings us much nearer to our
modern ways of looking at the problem of space and time.
‘Ir«qâ’s view of time-stratiﬁcations  I have given you
before.26 I will now give you the substance of his view of
space.

According to ‘Ir«qâ the existence of some kind of space in
relation to God is clear from the following verses of the
Qur’«n: 
‘Dost thou not see that God knoweth all that  is in the
heavens and all that is in the earth? Three persons speak
not privately together,  but He is their fourth;  nor ﬁve, but He
is their sixth; nor fewer nor more,  but wherever they be He
is with them’ (58:7).

‘Ye shall not be employed in aﬀairs, nor shall ye read a text
out of the Qur’«n, nor shall ye do any work, but We will be
witness over you when you are engaged therein; and the
weight of an atom on earth or in heaven escapeth not thy
Lord; nor is there aught27 that is less than this or greater,
but it is in the Perspicuous Book’ (10:61).

‘We created man, and We know what his soul whispereth to
him, and We are closer to him than his neck-vein’ (50:16).

But we must not forget that  the words proximity, contact,
and mutual separation which apply to material  bodies do
not apply to God. Divine life is in touch with the  whole
universe on the analogy of the soul’s contact with  the
body.28 The soul is neither inside nor outside the body;

193
neither proximate to nor separate from  it. Yet its contact
with every atom of the  body is real, and it is impossible to
conceive this contact except by positing some kind of space
which beﬁts the subtleness of the soul. The existence of
space in relation to the life of God, therefore, cannot be
denied;29 only we should carefully deﬁne the kind of space
which may be predicated of the Absoluteness of God. Now,
there are three kinds of space - the space of material
bodies, the space of immaterial beings, and the space of
God.30 The space of material bodies is further divided into
three kinds. First, the space of gross bodies of which we
predicate roominess. In this space movement takes time,
bodies occupy their respective places and resist
displacement. Secondly, the space of subtle bodies, e.g. air
and sound. In this space too bodies resist each other, and
their movement is measurable in terms  of time which,
however, appears to be diﬀerent to the  time of gross bodies.
The air in a tube must be displaced before other air can
enter into it; and the  time of sound-waves is practically
nothing compared to the time  of gross bodies. Thirdly, we
have the space of light. The light of the sun instantly
reaches the remotest limits of the earth.  Thus in the velocity
of light and sound time is reduced almost to zero. It is,
therefore, clear that the space of light  is diﬀerent to the
space of air and sound. There is, however, a more eﬀective
argument than this. The light of a candle spreads in all
directions in a room without displacing the  air in the room;
and this shows that the space of light is more subtle than
the space of air which has no entry into the space of light.31
In view of the close proximity of these spaces, however, it is
not possible to distinguish the one from the  other except by
purely intellectual analysis and spiritual

experience. Again, in the hot water the two opposites - ﬁre and water - which
appear to 32interpenetrate each other cannot, in view of their

194
respective natures, exist in the same space. The fact cannot
be explained except on the supposition that the spaces of
the two substances, though closely proximate to each other,
are nevertheless distinct. But while the element  of distance
is not entirely absent, there is no possibility  of mutual
resistance in the space of light. The light of a candle reaches
up to a certain point only, and the  lights of a hundred
candles intermingle in the same room without  displacing
one another.

Having thus described the spaces of physical bodies
possessing various degrees of subtleness ‘Ir«qâ proceeds
brieﬂy to describe the main varieties  of space operated
upon by the various classes of immaterial beings, e.g.
angels. The element of distance is not entirely absent from
these spaces; for immaterial beings, while they can easily
pass through stone walls, cannot altogether dispense with
motion which, according to ‘Ir«qâ, is evidence of
imperfection in spirituality.33 The highest point in the scale
of spatial freedom is reached by the human soul which, in
its unique essence, is neither at rest nor in motion.34 Thus
passing through the inﬁnite varieties  of space we reach the
Divine space which is absolutely free from all dimensions
and constitutes the meeting point  of all inﬁnities.35

From this summary of ‘Ir«qâ’s view you will see how a
cultured Muslim Suﬁ`intellectually  interpreted his spiritual
experience of time and space in an age which had no idea
of the theories and concepts of modern Mathematics and
Physics. ‘Ir«qâ is really trying to reach the concept of space
as a dynamic appearance. His mind seems to be vaguely
struggling with the  concept of space as an inﬁnite
continuum; yet he was unable to see the full implications  of
his thought partly because he was not a mathematician  and
partly because of his natural prejudice in favour of  the
traditional Aristotelian idea of  a ﬁxed universe. Again, the

195
interpenetration of the  super-spatial ‘here’ and super-
eternal ‘now’ in the Ultimate  Reality suggests the modern
notion of space-time which Professor Alexander, in his
lectures on ‘Space, Time, and Deity’, regards as the matrix
of all things.36 A keener insight into the nature of time would
have led ‘Ir«qâ to see that time is more fundamental  of the
two; and that it  is not a mere metaphor to say, as Professor
Alexander does say, that time is the mind of space.37 ‘Ir«qâ
conceives God’s relation to the universe on the analogy of
the relation of the human soul to the  body;38 but, instead of
philosophically reaching this position through a criticism  of
the spatial and temporal aspects of experience, he simply
postulates it on the basis of his spiritual experience. It  is not
suﬃcient merely to reduce space and time to  a vanishing
point-instant. The philosophical path that  leads to God as
the omnipsyche of the universe lies through the  discovery of
living thought as the ultimate  principle of space-time.
‘Ir«qâ’s mind, no doubt, moved in the right  direction, but  his
Aristotelian prejudices, coupled with a lack of psychological
analysis, blocked his progress. With his view that Divine
Time is utterly devoid of change39 - a view obviously based
on an inadequate analysis of conscious experience - it was
not possible for him to discover the relation  between Divine
Time and serial time, and to reach, through this discovery,
the essentially Islamic idea of continuous creation which
means a growing universe.

Thus all lines of Muslim thought converge on a dynamic
conception of the universe. This view is further reinforced by
Ibn Maskawaih’s theory of life as an evolutionary
movement, and Ibn Khaldën’s view of history. History or, in
the language of the Qur’«n, ‘the days of God’, is the third
source of human knowledge according to the Qur’«n. It is
one of the most essential teachings of the Qur’«n that
nations are collectively judged, and suﬀer for their  misdeeds

196
here and now.40 In order to establish this proposition, the
Qur’«n constantly cites historical instances, and urges upon
the reader to reﬂect on the past and present  experience of
mankind.

"Of old did We send Moses with Our signs, and said to him:
‘Bring forth thy people from  the darkness into the light,  and
remind them of the days of God." Verily, in this are signs for
every patient, grateful  person’ (14:5).

‘And among those whom We had created are a people who
guide others with truth,  and in accordance therewith act
justly. But as for those who treat Our signs as lies, We
gradually ring them down by means of which they  know not;
and though I lengthen their days, verily,  My stratagem is
eﬀectual’ (7:181-83).

‘Already, before your time, have precedents been made.
Traverse the Earth then, and see what hath been the end of
those who falsify the signs of God!’ (3:137). 
‘If a wound hath befallen you, a wound like it hath  already
befallen others; We alternate the days of successes and
reverses among peoples’ (3:140).

‘Every nation hath its ﬁxed period’  (7:34).41

The last verse is rather an instance of a more speciﬁc
historical generalization which, in its epigrammatic
formulation, suggests the possibility of a scientiﬁc  treatment
of the life of human societies regarded as organisms. It is,
therefore, a gross error to think that  the Qur’«n has no
germs of a historical doctrine. The truth is that  the whole
spirit of the ‘Prolegomena’ of Ibn Khaldën appears to have
been mainly due to the inspiration which  the author must
have received from the Qur’«n. Even in his judgements of
character he is, in no small degree, indebted to the Qur’«n.

197
An instance in point is his long paragraph devoted to an
estimate of the character of the  Arabs as a people. The
whole paragraph is a mere ampliﬁcation of the following
verses of the Qur’«n:

‘The Arabs of the desert are most stout in unbelief and
dissimulation; and likelier it is that  they should be unaware
of the laws which God hath sent down to His Apostle; and
God is Knowing, Wise.

‘Of the Arabs of the desert there are some who reckon what
they expend in the cause of God as tribute, and wait for
some change of fortune to befall you: a change for evil shall
befall them! God is the Hearer, the Knower’ (9:97-98).

However, the interest of the Qur’«n in history,  regarded as a
source of human knowledge, extends farther than mere
indications of historical generalizations. It has given us one
of the most fundamental principles of  historical criticism:
Since accuracy in recording facts which constitute the
material of history is an indispensable condition of history  as
a science, and an accurate knowledge of facts ultimately
depends on those who report them, the very ﬁrst  principle
of historical criticism is that  the reporter’s personal
character is an important factor  in judging his testimony.
The Qur’«n says:

‘O believers! if any bad man comes to you with a report,
clear it up at once’ (49:6).

It is the application of the principle  embodied in this verse
to the reporters of the Prophet’s traditions  out of which were
gradually evolved the canons of historical criticism.  The
growth of historical sense in Islam is a fascinating subject.42
The Quranic appeal to experience, the necessity to
ascertain the exact sayings of the Prophet, and the desire to

198
furnish permanent sources of inspiration to posterity  - all
these forces contributed to produce such men as Ibn
Ish«q,43 ñabarâ,44 and Mas‘ëdâ.45 But history, as an art of
ﬁring the reader’s imagination,  is only a stage in the
development of history as a genuine science. The possibility
of a scientiﬁc treatment  of history means a wider
experience, a greater maturity  of practical reason, and
ﬁnally a fuller realization of certain  basic ideas regarding the
nature of life and time. These ideas are in the main two; and
both form the foundation of  the Quranic teaching.

1. The Unity of Human Origin. ‘And We have created you all
from one breath of life’, says the Qur’«n.46 But the
perception of life as an organic unity is a slow achievement,
and depends for its growth on a people’s entry into  the main
current of world-events. This opportunity was brought  to
Islam by the rapid development of a vast empire.  No doubt,
Christianity, long before Islam, brought the message of
equality to mankind; but  Christian Rome did not rise to the
full apprehension of the idea of humanity as a single
organism. As Flint rightly says, ‘No Christian writer and still
less, of course, any other in the Roman Empire, can be
credited with having had more than a general and abstract
conception of human unity.’ And since the days of Rome the
idea does not seem to have gained much in depth and
rootage in Europe. On the other hand, the growth of
territorial nationalism,  with its emphasis on what is called
national characteristics, has tended rather to  kill the broad
human element in the art and literature  of Europe. It was
quite otherwise with Islam. Here the idea was neither a
concept of philosophy nor a dream of poetry. As a social
movement the aim of Islam was to make the idea a living
factor in the Muslim’s daily life, and thus  silently and
imperceptibly to carry it  towards fuller fruition.

199
2. A Keen Sense of the Reality of Time, and the Concept of
Life as a Continuous Movement in Time. It is this conception
of life and time which is the main point of interest in Ibn
Khaldën’s view of history, and which justiﬁes Flint’s eulogy
that ‘Plato, Aristotle, and Augustine were not his peers, and
all others were unworthy of being even mentioned along
with him’.47 From the remarks that I have made above I do
not mean to throw doubt on the originality of Ibn Khaldën.
All that I mean to say is that, considering the direction in
which the culture of Islam had unfolded itself, only a Muslim
could have viewed history as a continuous, collective
movement, a real inevitable development in time. The point
of interest in this view of history is the way in which Ibn
Khaldën conceives the process of change. His conception is
of inﬁnite importance because of the implication that
history, as a continuous movement in time, is a genuinely
creative movement and not a movement whose path is
already determined. Ibn Khaldën was not a metaphysician.
Indeed he was hostile to Metaphysics.48 But in view of the
nature of his conception of time he may fairly be regarded
as a forerunner of Bergson. I have already discussed the
intellectual antecedents of this conception in the cultural
history of Islam. The Quranic view of the ‘alternation of day
and night’49 as a symbol of the Ultimate Reality which
‘appears in a fresh glory every moment’,50 the tendency in
Muslim Metaphysics to regard time as objective, Ibn
Maskawaih’s view of life as an evolutionary movement,51
and lastly al-Bârënâ’s deﬁnite approach to the conception of
Nature as a process of becoming52 - all this constituted the
intellectual inheritance of Ibn Khaldën. His chief merit lies in
his acute perception of, and systematic expression to, the
spirit of the cultural movement of which he was a most
brilliant product. In the work of this genius the anticlassical
spirit of the Qur’«n scores its ﬁnal victory over Greek
thought; for with the Greeks time was either unreal, as in

200
Plato and Zeno, or moved in a circle, as in Heraclitus and
the Stoics.53 Whatever may be the criterion by which to
judge the forward steps of a creative movement,  the
movement itself, if  conceived as cyclic, ceases to be
creative. Eternal recurrence is not eternal creation; it  is
eternal repetition.

We are now in a position to see the true signiﬁcance of the
intellectual revolt  of Islam against Greek philosophy. The
fact that this  revolt originated in a purely  theological
interest shows that the anti-classical spirit  of the Qur’«n
asserted itself in spite of those who began with a  desire to
interpret Islam in the  light of Greek thought.

It now remains to eradicate a grave misunderstanding
created by Spengler’s widely read book, The Decline of the
West. His two chapters devoted to the problem of Arabian
culture54 constitute a most important contribution  to the
cultural history of Asia. They are, however, based on a
complete misconception of the nature  of Islam as a religious
movement, and of the cultural  activity which  it initiated.
Spengler’s main thesis is that each culture is a speciﬁc
organism, having no point of contact with  cultures that
historically precede or follow it.  Indeed, according to him,
each culture has its own peculiar way of looking at things
which is entirely inaccessible to men belonging to a diﬀerent
culture. In his anxiety to prove  this thesis he marshals an
overwhelming array of facts and interpretations  to show
that the spirit  of European culture is through and through
anti-classical. And this anti-classical spirit of European
culture is entirely due to  the speciﬁc genius of Europe, and
not to any inspiration  she may have received from the
culture of Islam which, according to Spengler, is thoroughly
‘Magian’ in spirit and character. Spengler’s view of the spirit
of modern culture is, in my opinion, perfectly  correct. I have,
however, tried to show in these lectures that  the

201
anticlassical spirit of the modern world has really arisen out
of the revolt of Islam against Greek thought.55 It is obvious
that such a view cannot be acceptable to Spengler; for, if it
is possible to show that the anti-classical spirit of modern
culture is due to the inspiration which  it received from the
culture immediately preceding it,  the whole argument of
Spengler regarding the complete mutual independence of
cultural growths would collapse. I am afraid Spengler’s
anxiety to establish this thesis has completely perverted  his
vision of Islam as a cultural movement.

By the expression ‘Magian culture’ Spengler means the
common culture associated with what he calls ‘Magian
group of religions’,56 i.e. Judaism, ancient Chaldean religion,
early Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Islam. That a Magian
crust has grown over Islam, I do not deny. Indeed my main
purpose in these lectures has been to secure a vision of the
spirit of Islam as emancipated from its Magian overlayings
which, in my opinion, have misled Spengler. His ignorance of
Muslim thought on the problem of time,  as well as of the
way in which the ‘I’, as a free centre of experience, has
found expression in the religious experience of Islam, is
simply appalling.57 Instead of seeking light from the history
of Muslim thought and experience, he prefers to base his
judgement on vulgar beliefs as to the beginning and end  of
time. Just imagine a man of overwhelming learning ﬁnding
support for the supposed fatalism of Islam in such Eastern
expressions and proverbs as the ‘vault of time’,58 and
‘everything has a time!’59 However, on the origin and
growth of the concept of time  in Islam, and on the human
ego as a free power, I have said enough in these lectures. It
is obvious that a full examination of Spengler’s view of
Islam, and of the culture that grew out  of it, will require a
whole volume. In addition to what I have said before, I shall
oﬀer here one more observation of a general nature.

202
‘The kernel of the prophetic teaching,’  says Spengler, ‘is
already Magian. There is one God - be He called Yahweh,60
Ahuramazda, or Marduk-Baal - who is the principle of good,
and all other deities are either  impotent or evil. To this
doctrine there attached itself  the hope of a Messiah, very
clear in Isaiah, but also bursting out everywhere during  the
next centuries, under pressure of an inner necessity. It is the
basic idea of Magian religion, for it contains implicitly  the
conception of the world-historical struggle  between Good
and Evil, with the power of Evil prevailing in the  middle
period, and the Good ﬁnally triumphant  on the Day of
Judgement.’60 If this view of the prophetic teaching is
meant to apply to Islam it  is obviously a misrepresentation.
The point to note is that the  Magian admitted the existence
of false gods; only they did not turn  to worship them. Islam
denies the very existence of false gods. In this connexion
Spengler fails to appreciate the cultural value  of the idea of
the ﬁnality  of prophethood in Islam. No doubt, one
important feature  of Magian culture is a perpetual attitude
of expectation, a constant looking forward  to the coming of
Zoroaster’s unborn sons, the Messiah, or the Paraclete of
the fourth gospel. I have already indicated  the direction in
which the student of Islam should seek the cultural  meaning
of the doctrine of ﬁnality  in Islam. It may further  be
regarded as a psychological cure for the Magian attitude of
constant expectation which tends to  give a false view of
history. Ibn Khaldën, seeing the spirit of his own view of
history, has fully criticized  and, I believe, ﬁnally demolished
the alleged revelational basis in Islam of an idea similar, at
least in its psychological eﬀects, to the  original Magian idea
which had reappeared in Islam under the pressure of Magian
thought.61

Lecture  V Notes:   THE SPIRIT OF MUSLIM CULTURE
 1. Cf. ‘Abd al-Quddës Gangàhâ, Lat«’if-i Quddësâ, ed. Shaikh
Rukn al-Di`n, LaÇâfah 79; the Persian text rendered into

203
English here is:

Reference may also be made here to very pithy and
profound jottings of Allama Iqbal on the back cover of his
own copy of William James’s Varieties of Religious
Experience, especially to those under the sub-heading:
‘Mystical and Prophetic Consciousness’ with explicit mention
of ‘Abd al-Quddu`s Gango`hi`; see Muhammad Siddiq,
Descriptive Catalogue of Allama Iqbal’s Personal Library,
Plate No. 8.

2. This great idea is embodied in the Quranic verse 33:40,
i.e. ‘Muhammad... is All«h’s Apostle and the Seal of all
Prophets, (Muhammad-un rasël All«h wa kh«tam-un
nabâyyân). It has also been variously enunciated in the
Àadâth literature (i) y« Muhammad-u anta rasël Ull«h-i wa
kh«tam al-anbiy«’ : ‘O Muhammad! you are Allah’s Apostle
and the Seal of all Prophets’; this is what other Prophets
would proclaim on the Day of Resurrection (Bukh«râ, Tafsâr:
17). (ii) Wa ‘an«kh«tim-un-nabâyyân: ‘And I am the last of
the Prophets’ (ibid., Man«qib: 7; Muslim, ¥m«n: 327). (iii)
Laisa nabâyyu ba’dâ: ‘There is no Prophet after me’
(Bukh«râ, Magh«zâ: 77). (iv) L«nabâyya badâ: ‘There is no
Prophet after me’ (ibid., Anbâya: 50; Muslim, Im«rah: 44;
Fad«’il al-Sah«bah: 30-31). (v) Wa l«nabâyya ba’dahë: ‘And
there is no Prophet after him’, said so by Abë Awf« as
narrated by Ism«‘âl (Bukh«râ, ÿd«b: 109). (vi) L«nubuwwah
ba’dâ: ‘There is no prophethood after me’ (Muslim, Fad«‘
alSah«bah: 30-32).

3. Though wahy matluww (revelation which is recited  or
worded revelation) is speciﬁc to the Prophets, the Qur’«n
speaks of revelation in connection with earth  (99:5),
heavens (41:12), honey-bee (16:68-69), angels (8:12),
mother of Moses (28:7) and disciples of Jesus (5:111). As to
the diﬀerent modes of revelation  see 42:51.

204
4. Reference here is to the last but one passage of the
Quranic verse 5:3 which reads: ‘This day have I perfected
your religion for you and completed My favour unto  you and
have chosen for you as religion al-Isl«m’. This passage,
according to all available aÁ«dâth on the testimony  of the
Prophet’s contemporaries, was revealed at ‘Araf«t in the
afternoon of Friday, the 9th of Dhu’l-Àijjah 10 A.H., the year
of the Prophet’s last pilgrimage to Makkah (cf. Bukha`ri`,
¥m«n: 34, where this fact is authenticated  by Haîrat ‘Umar
b. al-Khatta`b). It is to  be noted that the Prophet’s death
took place eighty-one of eighty-two  days after the revelation
of this verse and as it speaks of the perfection of religion  in
Islam, no precept of legal import whatsoever was revealed
after it; cf. R«zâ, al-Tafsâr al-Kabâr.

5. Qur’«n, 41:53.

6. The ﬁrst half of the formula  of Islam is: l«il«h ill All«h, i.e.
there is no god but Allah, or nothing whatever  is worthy of
worship except Allah. The other half is Muhammad-un
Rasëlull«h, i.e. Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. The
expression ‘formula of Islam’ signiﬁes that  by bearing
witness to the truth  of these two simple propositions a man
enters the fold of Islam.

7. Cf. Bukh«râ, Jan«’iz: 78; Shah«dah: 3; and Jih«d: 160 and
178 (Eng. trans. M. Muhsin Khan, II, 244-45; III, 488-89, and
IV, 168-69 and 184-86) and Muslim: Fitan: 95-96 (Eng. trans.
A.H. Siddiqi, IV, 1510-15).

8. Cf. Muqaddimah, trans. Rosenthal, Vol. III, Section vi,
Discourse: ‘The Science of Suﬁsm’; D. B. Macdonald,
Religious Attitude and Life in Islam, pp. 165-74, and M.
Syrier, ‘Ibn Khaldu`n and Mysticism’, Islamic Culture, XXI/ii
(1947), 264-302.

205
9. Reference here is to the Quranic verses: 41:37; 25:45;
10:6; 30:22 and 3:140 bearing on the phenomena of  Nature
which have quite often been named in the  Qur’«n as «y«t
All«h, i.e. the ‘apparent signs of God’ (R«ghib, al-Mufrad«t,
pp. 32-33); this is followed by reference to verses 25:73 and
17:72 which in the present context  clearly make it as much
a religious duty of the ‘true  servants of the Most Gracious
God ‘Iba`d-ur-Rahma`n’ to ponder over these apparent
signs of God ‘as revealed to the sense-perception of man’ as
to ponder over the Divine communications («y«t al-Qur’«n)
revealed to the Holy Prophet - this two-way God-
consciousness alone ensures man’s physical and spiritual
prosperity in this life  as well as in the life hereafter.
10. Cf. G. H. Lewes, The Biographical History of Philosophy
(1857), p. 306, lines, 4-8, where Lewes says: ‘It is this work
(‘Reviviﬁcation of the Sciences of Religion’) which A. Schmö
lders has translated; it bears so remarkable a resemblance
to the Discours de la mé thod’ of Descartes, that had any
translation of it  existed in the days of Descartes, everyone
would have cried against the plagiarism’.  The second
sentence of this passage was quoted by Allama Iqbal in his
doctoral dissertation: The Development of Metaphysics in
Persia (1908), p. 73, note (1), in support of his statement
that Ghazz«lâ anticipated Descartes in his philosophical
method’.

It is to be noted that  Schmö lders’ Essai sur les é coles
philosophiques chez les Arabes (Paris, 1842) was not the
French translation of Ghazz«lâ’s voluminous ‘Reviviﬁcation’
(Ihy«’ ‘Ulëm al-Dân in forty books) but that  of his
autobiographical work Al-Munqidh min al-Dal«l with its
earliest edited Arabic text.  It seems that the remarkable
originality and boldness of Ghazz«lâ’s thought in the French
version of al-Munqidh led Lewes to confuse it with the
greater, the more famous ‘Reviviﬁcation’  (Ihy«). For the
‘amazing resemblance’ between Ghazz«lâ’s AlMunqidh min

206
al-Dal«l (Liberation from Error) and Descartes’ Discours de
la method’ (Discourse on Method), see Professor M. M.
Sharif, ‘The Inﬂuence of Muslim Thought on the West’,
‘Section: D’, A History of Muslim Philosophy, II, 1382-84.

11. Cf. al-QisÇ«s al-Mustaqâm, trans. D.P. Brewster (The Just
Balance), chapters ii-vi and translator’s Appendix III: ‘Al-
Ghazz«lâ and the Syllogism’, pp. 126-30; cf. also Michael E.
Marmura, ‘Ghaza`li`’s Attitude  to the Secular Sciences and
Logic’, Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science, ed. G. F.
Hourani, Section II, pp. 102-03, and Susanna Diwald’s
detailed review on al-QisÇ«s in Der Islam (1961), pp. 171-
74.

12. For an account of Ishra`qi`’s criticism  of Greek logic
contained in his Hikmat al-Ishr«q, cf. S. Hossein Nasr,
‘Shiha`b al-Di`n Suhrawardi`Maqtu`l’,  A History of Muslim
Philosophy, I, 384-85; a fuller account of Ishra`qi`’s  logic,
according to Nicholas Rescher, is to be found in his extant
but unpublished (?) Kit«b al-Talwâh«t and Kit«b al-Lamah«t
(cf. Development of Arabic Logic, p. 185). It is to be noted
that the earliest  explanation of Ishra`qi`’s  disagreement
with Aristotle that  logical deﬁnition is genus plus diﬀerentia,
in terms of modern (Bosanquet’s) logic, was given by Allama
Iqbal in his Development of Metaphysics in Persia, pp. 97-
98.

For an expose of Ibn Taimâyyah’s logical masterpiece al-
Radd ‘ala’l-Mantâqâyin (Refutation of the Logicians’) cf.
Serajul Haque, ‘Ibn Taimi`yyah’ in A History of Muslim
Philosophy, II, 805-12; also Majid Fakhry, A History of Islamic
Philosophy (pp. 352-53) for a lucid summing up. A valuable
study of Ibn Taimi`yyah’s logical ideas is that by ‘Alâ S«mâ
al-Nashsh«r in Man«hij al-Bahth ‘inda Mufakkiri’l-Isl«m wa
Naqd al-Muslimân li’l-Mantiq al-Aristat«lâsâ, chapter III,
sections ii and iii. Al-Nashsh«r has also edited Suyëtâ’s Jahd

207
al-Qarih«h ﬁ tajrâd alNasâhah, an abridgment of ibn
Taimâyyah’s Al-Radd ‘ala’l-Mantiqiyân.

13. Aristotle’s ﬁrst ﬁgure, al-shakl al-awwal or al-qiyas al-
k«mil of the Muslim logicians, is a form of syllogism in which
the middle term occurs as a subject in the ﬁrst premiss and
as a predicate in the second premiss. It is the only form of
syllogism in which the conclusion becomes available in the
form of a general (universal - proposition needed for
scientiﬁc purposes; cf. M. Saeed Sheikh, A Dictionary of
Muslim Philosophy, s.v.

As to the criticism of the ﬁrst ﬁgure referred to here, it is
more rightly to be ascribed to Fakhr al-Dân R«zâ, who,
besides his own now available logical works, wrote quite a
few critical commentaries on the works of Ibn Sân«, rather
than to the eminent physician of Islam, Abë Bakr Zakarâya
R«zâ, none of whose short treatises on some parts of the
Aristotelian Organon seems to have survived; cf. Nicholas
Rescher, The Development of Arabic Logic, pp. 117-18.
Happily this stands conﬁrmed by Allama Iqbal’s Presidential
comments (almost all of which have been incorporated in
the present passage) on Khwajah Kamal’s Lecture (in Urdu)
on ‘Islam and Modern Sciences’ in the third session of the
All-India Muhammadan Educational Conference, 1911, in
Delhi; see S.’A.’Vahid (ed.), Maq«l«t-i Iqb«l, pp. 239-40; cf.
also Allama’s letter dated 1st February 1924 to Sayyid
Sulaim«n Nadvâ, Iqb«ln«mah, I, 127-28; reference in both
cases is to Fakhr al-Dân al-R«zâ and not to Abë Bakr R«zâ.

It is to be noted that of all the writings of Allama Iqbal
including his more than 1200 letters Abë Bakr R«zi`is
mentioned only in Development of Metaphysics in Persia:
‘as a physician and as a thinker who admitted the eternity
of matter, space and time and possibly looked upon light as
the ﬁrst creation’ (pp. 24, 96). In a signiﬁcant passage on p.

208
96 of this work Allama has listed about ten Muslim thinkers
who were highly critical either  of Greek philosophy in
general or Greek logic in particular – Abë Bakr R«zâ’s name
does not appear in this list.
14. This is Ibn Hazm’s Àudëd al-Mantiq referred to in his
well-known Kit«b al-Fisal (I, 4 and 20; V, 70 and 128) under
somewhat varied titles; also mentioned  by his contemporary
and compatriot Sa`’id b. Ahmad alAndalusâ in his ñabaq«t
al-Umam (p.’118) and later listed by  Brockelmann in GAL;
Supplementbä nde (I, 696). C. van Arendonk, however, in
his article on ‘Ibn Hazm’ in The Encyclopaedia of Islam (II,
385) and I. Goldziher, s.v. in Encyclopaedia of Religion and
Ethics, VII, 71 have declared that ‘the work has not
survived’. And certainly very  little was heard of this work
until Dr Ihsan ‘Abba`s of the University  of Khartoum
discovered possibly the only MS and published it under the
title: al-ñaqrâb li-Àadd al-Mantiq (The Approach to the Limits
of Logic) in 1959. Allama’s comments on Ibn Àazm’s ‘Scope
of Logic’ (Hudëd al-Mantiq), at a time when it was generally
considered to have been lost is a proof of his extraordinary
knowledge of Muslim writers and their works.

15. Cf. Development of Metaphysics in Persia (1964), p. 64,
where it is stated that  ‘Al-Birënâand Ibn Haitham (d. 1038) .
. . anticipated modern empirical  psychology in recognizing
what is called reaction-time’:  in the two footnotes to  this
statement Allama Iqb«l quotes from de Boer’s History of
Philosophy in Islam, pp. 146 and 150, to establish the
positivism, i.e. sense-empiricism respectively of both  al-
Birënâ and Ibn Haitham. On pp. 151-52 of this work is a
passage (possibly referred to by Allama Iqbal here) which
describes reaction-time very much in the  modern sense:
‘not only is every sensation attended  by a corresponding
change localized in the sense-organ, which demands a
certain time, but  also, between the stimulation of the  organ
and consciousness of the perception an interval of time

209
must elapse, corresponding to the transmission of stimulus
for some distance along the nerves.’

As to al-Kindâ’s discovery that sensation is proportionate to
stimulus, cf. de Boer, op. cit., p. 101, where he speaks of
‘the proportional relation  existing between stimulus and
sensation’ in connection with al-Kindâ’s mathematized
theory of compound remedies. This is given in al-Kindâ’s
celebrated treatise: Ris«lah ﬁ Ma‘rifah Quwwat-Adwâyat al-
Murakkabah which was at least twice translated into Latin
(Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, II, 342 and
896).

16. Cf. Opus Majus, trans. Robert Belle Burke, Vol. II, Part V
(pp. 419-82). It is important  to note that Sarton’s
observation on Roger Bacon’s work on optics is very close to
that of Allama Iqbal. ‘His optics’, says Sarton, ‘was
essentially based upon that of Ibn al-Haitham, with small
additions and practical applications’ (op. cit.,  II, 957). As
reported by Dr M. S. N«mës, Allama Iqbal helped him in
understanding the rotographs of the  only MS (No. 2460 in
Bibliothé que Nationale, Paris) of Ibn Haitham’s T«hrâr al-
Man«zir for a number of days; cf. Ibn al-Haitham:
Proceedings of the Celebrations of 1000th Anniversary (held
in November 1969 under the auspices of Hamdard National
Foundation Pakistan, Karachi), p. 128.

See, however, Professor A. I. Sabra’s scholarly article: ‘Ibn
al-Haytham’ in Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography,  VI, 189-
210, especially p. 205 where he gives an up-to-date
information about the  MSS of Ibn Haitham’s Kit«b al-
Man«zir. According to Professor Sabra, ‘The reference in
Brockelmann to a recension of this work in the Paris MS, ar.
2460 (Brockelmann has 2640) is mistaken; the MS is a
recension of Euclid’s Optics which is attributed on the title
page to Hasan ibn (Mës«ibn) Sh«kir’.

210
17. ‘Ibn Hazm’ here is a palpable misprint for ‘ibn  Haitham’ -
the context of the  passage more ﬁttingly demands and
latter rather  than the former name. Ibn Hazm’s inﬂuence on
Roger Bacon’s Opus Majus, a predominantly science-
oriented work, looks somewhat odd. There seems to be no
evidence of it in the text  of Opus Majus - Ibn Hazm is not
even so much as mentioned by name in this work. Sarton,
despite his great praise for Ibn Hazm’s scholarship (op. cit. I,
713), nowhere hints at his contributions  to ‘science’ or his
inﬂuence of Roger Bacon, nor is this to be found in other
standard works, for example, in the sixteen-volume
Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography.

18. Qur’«n, 53:42.

19. For ñësâ’s discussion of the parallel postulate (also
named ‘axiom of parallelism’),  see his ‘Al-Ris«lat alSh«fâyan
‘an al-Shakk ﬁ’l-Khutët al-Mutaw«zâyah’ in (ñësâ’s) Ras«’il,
Vol. II, Pt. viii, pp. 1-40. Commenting on this work Sarton
observes (op. cit., II, 1003): ‘NaÄâr al-Dân’s discussion was
remarkably elaborate’. Cf. also Cajori, A History of
Elementary Mathematics, p. 127, Q. À«ﬁz ñauq«`n, Tur«th
al-‘Arab al-‘Ilmâ, pp. 97-98, R. Bonola, Non-Euclidean
Geometry, pp. 12-13 and 37-38 and Dr S. H. Nasr’s article:
‘Al-ñësâ’ in Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, XIII, 508-14
especially p. 510.
20. This passage may be read in conjunction with Allama
Iqbal’s observation on ñësâ in his Sectional Presidential
Address (delivered at the Fifth Oriental Conference, Lahore,
on 20 November 1928): ‘A Plea for the Deeper Study of
Muslim Scientists’: ‘It is Tusi’s eﬀort to improve the  parallel
postulate of Euclid that is believed to  have furnished a basis
in Europe for the problem of space which eventually led to
the theories of Gauss and Riemann’ (Speeches, Writings and
Statements of Iqbal, p. 138). Euclid’s parallel postulate is
Postulate V of the ﬁrst book of his Elements. What it means

211
to say is that through a given  point ‘P’ there can be only one
straight line ‘L’ parallel  to a given straight line.  It is to be
noted that to Euclid’s successors this postulate had signally
failed to appear self-evident, and had equally failed to
appear indemonstrable - hence, Allama Iqbal’s generalized
statement that  ‘since the days of Ptolemy (87-165 A.D.) till
the time of NaÄâr ñësâ nobody gave serious thought’ to the
postulate. Deeper and wider implication of the  postulate,
however, cannot be denied. ‘The innumerable attempts  to
prove this ﬁfth postulate  on the one hand and the
development of the non-Euclidean geometries on the other
are as many tributes to Euclid’s wisdom’, says Sarton (op.
cit., I, 153). A long note on the postulate  by Spengler - well
versed in mathematics - in his Decline of the West, 1, 176,
admirably brings out its  deep philosophical import.

These non-Euclidean geometries were developed in the
nineteenth century  by certain European mathematicians:
Gauss (1777-1855) in Germany, Lobachevski (1792-1856) in
Russia, Bolyai (1802-1860) in Hungary and Riemann (1826-
1866) in Germany. They abandoned the attempt to prove
Euclid’s parallel postulate for they discovered that  Euclid’s
postulates of geometry were not the  only possible
postulates and that other sets of  postulates could be
formulated arbitrarily  and self-consistent geometries based
on them. They further discovered that  the space assumed in
Euclidean geometry is only a special case of a more general
type. These non-Euclidean geometries assumed immense
scientiﬁc signiﬁcance when it was found that  the space-time
continuum required by Einstein’s theory of  gravitation is
non-Euclidean.

This in short is the movement of the idea of parallel
postulate from Euclid to Einstein. Allama Iqbal with his seer-
like vision for ideas was very much perceptive of this
‘movement’ and also of the  scientiﬁc and philosophical

212
signiﬁcance of the non-Euclidean geometries. It is to be
noted that Allama’s keenly perceptive  mind took full notice
of the scientiﬁc developments of  his days, for example, of
anti-mechanistic biologism (neo-vitalism)  of Hans Driesch
and J. S. Haldane and of quantum theory as well as of
relativity-physics especially as expounded by Eddington,
Louis Rougier, Lord Haldane, Wildon Carr and other
philosopherscientists. Among other things, one may notice a
score of books on the ‘Philosophy of Contemporary Science,
more than half of which are on relativity-physics  (mostly
published between 1920 and 1928) in his personal library
alone. See M. Siddiq, Descriptive Catalogue of Allama Iqbal’s
Personal Library, pp. 4-7 and 71-76, as well as Plates Nos.
22 and 23 giving the facsimiles of Allama’s signatures dated
July 1921 and September 1921 on his own copies of
Einstein’s work: Relativity: The Special and the General
Theory: A Popular Exposition (1920) and Edwin E. Slosson’s
Easy Lessons in Einstein (1920); cf. also Dr Ahmad Nabi
Khan, Relics of Allama Iqbal (Catalogue), books listed at IV.
41 and IV. 46. The ﬁrst book The Mystery of Space by Robert
T. Browne by its very sub-title: ‘A Study of the Hyperspace
Movement in the Light of the Evolution of New Psychic
Faculties and an Inquiry into the Genesis and Essential
Nature of Space’ suggests that it was probably this book
which was foremost in Allama’s mind when he spoke of
highly mathematical  notion of ‘hyperspace movement’  in
connection with Tusi’s eﬀort to improve the  parallel
postulate here as well as in his ‘Plea for Deeper Study’
(Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal, p. 141).
Allama’s keen interest in higher mathematics  is evinced by
his references in the present rather compact discussion on
Newton’s interpolation formula,  recent developments in
European mathematics and Whitehead’s view of relativity  as
distinguished from that  of Einstein. For the development of
Allama’s interest in certain mathematical  key-concepts and
in sciences in general see M. Saeed Sheikh, ‘Allama Iqbal’s

213
interest in the Sciences’, Iqbal Review, XXX/i (April-June,
1989), 31-43.

21. Cf. a fairy long passage from Spengler’s Decline of the
West (I, 75) quoted in Allama’s Address: ‘A Plea for Deeper
Study of the Muslim Scientists’ and an account of the way
he went into the authentication  of al-Bârënâ’s view of
mathematical function  (Speeches, Writings and Statements
of Iqbal, pp. 135-36). Allama’s interest in ‘mathematical  idea
of function’ seems to be two-fold:  religio-philosophical and
scientiﬁc. The function-idea, he says, ‘turns the ﬁxed  into
the variable, and sees the universe not as being but as
becoming’. This is in full accord with the Quranic view of the
universe which God has built with power and it is He Who is
steadily expanding it (cf. M. Asad, The Message of the
Qur’«n, p. 805, note 31) and again ‘He adds to his creation
whatever He wills: for verily, God has the power to will
anything’ (35:1). The Quranic view of the growing  universe
is thus ‘a clear departure’ from  the Aristotelian view of the
ﬁxed universe. Aristotle’s doctrine  of potentiality passing
into actuality  fails to resolve the mystery of becoming, in  its
living historicity  and novelty or, as W. D. Ross has put it:
‘The conception of potentiality  has often been used to cover
mere barrenness of thought’ (cf. his Aristotle, p. 176).
Hence, Allama’s repeated pronouncement, that the spirit  of
the Qur’«n is essentially anti-classical. Philosophically
speaking, time, which in the present context  has been
linked up with the notion  of functionality and rightly  so, is
the most indispensable condition for the  very possibility and
reality of human experience, cognitive  or moral. This
explains, partly at least, why ‘Time’  is the recurring theme
in Allama’s works in both prose and verse.

In mathematics function is a relationship  of correspondence
between two variables called independent variable  and
dependent variable and is expressed by saying ‘y is a

214
function of x’ which means y change with  x , so that for a
certain value of x, y has a certain value (or values). In
Europe though the term ‘function’  in its full mathematical
sense was ﬁrst used by Leibniz in 1694, the theory of
functions had already emerged with the  analytic geometry
of Pierce Fermat in 1629 and that of the father of modern
philosophy Ré ne Descartes - Descartes’ La Geometrie
appeared along with his better known Discours de la mé
thode in 1637. After that  such rapid advances took place in
mathematics that  within, say, ﬁfty  years it was completely
metamorphosed into its modern form  or, as Spengler puts it:
‘Once this immense creation found wings, its rise was
miraculous’. Being well versed in mathematics, Spengler
gives an exciting account of the new discoveries of the
Western mathematicians and their impact of  European
science and arts (op. cit., I, 74-90). Two of his statements
are to be noted. Not until the  theory of functions was fully
evolved, says Spengler, ‘could this mathematics be
unreservedly brought to bear in the  parallel sphere of our
dynamic Western physics’. Generally speaking, this means
that Nature speaks the subtle and complex language of
mathematics and that  without the use of this language the
breath-taking progress of science in the West, since the
seventeenth century, would have been a sheer impossibility.
Spengler, however, did not care to know that the
mathematical idea of function  originated, not in the  West,
but in the East, more particularly  with the most brilliant  al-
Bârënâ’s Al-Qnën al Mas‘ëdâ in 1030, i.e. six hundred years
before Fermat and Descartes.

The second statement to be noted is that, according to
Spengler, ‘The history of Western knowledge is thus one of
progressive emancipation from classical thought’ (ibid,  p.
76). As it is, Allama Iqbal has the least quarrel with Spengler
on the truth of  this statement for he says: ‘The most
remarkable phenomenon of modern history, however, is the

215
enormous rapidity with which the  world of Islam is spiritually
moving towards the West. There is nothing wrong in this
movement, for European culture, on its intellectual  side, is
only a further development  of some of the most important
phases of the culture of Islam’ (Lecture I, p. 6: italics mine).
And further, ‘Spengler’s view of the spirit  of modern culture
is, in my opinion, perfectly correct’  (p. 114). What Allama
Iqbal, however, rightly insists is ‘that  the anticlassical spirit
of the modern world has really arisen out of the  revolt of
Islam against Greek thought’ (ibid). This revolt consists in
Islam’s focusing its vision on ‘the concrete’,  ‘the particular’
and ‘the becoming as against the Greeks’ search for ‘the
ideal’ ‘the universal’  and ‘the being’. Spengler failed to  see
these Islamic ingredients of modern culture because of his
self-evolved thesis ‘that each culture is a speciﬁc organism,
having no point of contact with  cultures that historically
precede or follow it’. Spengler’s thesis has its roots, not in
any scientiﬁcally established dynamics of history,  but in his
uncompromising theory of cultural  holism (note the sub-title
of the ﬁrst volume  of his work: Gestalt und Wirklichkeit). Cf.
W. H. Dray’s article, ‘Spengler, Oswald’, in Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, VII, 527-30 for critical evaluation of Spengler’s
philosophical position.

22. Cf. M. A. Kazim, ‘al-Bârënâ and Trignometry’, al-Bârënâ
Commemoration Volume, esp. pp. 167-68, for the English
translation of the passage from al-Bârënâ’s al-Q«nën al-
Mas‘ëdâ wherein al-Bârënâ generalizes his interpolation
formula ‘from trignometrical  function  to any function
whatever’. This is likely the passage pointedly referred to  by
Allama Iqbal in his ‘A Plea for Deeper Study of the Muslim
Scientists’ (Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal, p.
136). See, however, Professor E. S. Kennedy’s highly
commendable article on ‘al-Bârënâ’ in Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, II, 147-58. He bases al- Bârënâ’s theory

216
of function on his ‘Treatise on Shadows’ already translated
by him.

23. Cf. M. R. Siddiqi, ‘Mathematics and Astronomy’, A History
of Muslim Philosophy, ed. M. M. Sharif, II, 
1280, and Juan Vernet, ‘Mathematics, Astronomy, Optics’,
The Legacy of Islam ed. Joseph Schacht and C. E. Bosworth,
pp. 466-68. According to Sarton, al-Khaw«rizmâ may be
called one of the founders of analysis or algebra as distinct
from geometry’ and that  his astronomical and trignometric
tables were the ﬁrst Muslim tables which contained,  not
simply the sine function, but  also the tangent’ (op. cit.,  I,
563).

24. Cf. Al-Fauz al-Asghar, pp. 78-83; also Development of
Metaphysics in Persia, p. 29 where an account of Ibn
Maskawaih’s theory of evolution is given as summed up by
Shiblâ Nu’m«ni in his ‘Ilm al-Kal«m, pp. 141-43.

25. This is a reference to the views of Khw«jah Muhammad
P«rs«as contained in his short but valuable tractate on time
and space: Ris«lah dar Zam«n-o-Mak«n, the only extant MS
(6 folios) of which, perhaps, is the one listed by A. Monzavi
in his Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts, Vol II, Part I, p. 800.
I am greatly indebted to  Q«zâ Mahmëd ul Haq of British
Library, London, for the microﬁlm of this  MS. This resulted
as a preliminary in the publication  of Urdu translation of
Khw«jah Muhammad P«rs«’s Ris«lah dar Zam«n-o-Mak«n
along with a brief account of his life  and works by Dr Khw«ja
Hamâd Yazd«nâ in Al-Ma‘«rif (Lahore), XVII/vii, July 1984),
31-42, 56. Cf. Nadhr S«birâ, Gh«yat al-Imk«n ﬁ Ma’rifat al-
Zam«n by Shaikh Mahmëd Ashnawâ, ‘Introduction’, p. ‘r’
where it is alleged that Khw«jah P«rs«made an extensive
use of Ashnawâ’s said tractate on space and time, which is
not very unlikely seeing the close resemblance between the

217
two tractates; yet  at places Khw«jah P«rs«’s treatment of
the subject is suﬁstically more sophisticated.

26. Cf. Lecture II, pp. 60-61.
 27. Misprinted as ‘weight’ in previous editions; see also the
signiﬁcant Quranic text repeated in  verse 34:3.
 28. Cf. Gh«yat al-Imk«n ﬁ Dirayat al-Mak«n, ed. Rahâm
Farmanâsh, pp. 16-17; English trans. A. H. Kamali, p. 13. On
the authorship of this suﬁstic  tractate on space and time,
see note 34 in Lecture III.
 29. Ibid., p. 17; English trans., p. 13.
 30. Ibid., p. 23; English trans., p. 17.
 31. Ibid., pp. 24-25; English trans., pp. 18-19.
 32. Ibid., p. 25; English trans., p. 19.
 33. Ibid., p. 17; English trans., pp. 20-21.
 34. Ibid., pp. 27-28; English trans., p. 21.
 35. Ibid., pp. 28-29; English trans., pp. 21-22.

36. Cf. Space, Time and Deity, II, 41; also R. Metz, A
Hundred Years of British Philosophy, pp. 634-38, and article
‘S. Alexander’ in The Dictionary of Philosophy, ed. D. D.
Runes, wherein it is made clear that the term ‘deity’  is not
used by Alexander in any theological sense but in terms of
his doctrine of emergent evolution:  ‘The quality next above
any given level (of evolution) is deity  to the beings on that
level’.

218
37. Alexander’s metaphor that time  is mind of space is to be
found in statements such as this: ‘It  is that Time as a whole
and in its parts bears to space as a whole and its
corresponding parts a relation analogous to the relation of
mind . . . or to put the  matter shortly  that Time is the mind
of Space and Space the body of Time’ (Space, Time and
Deity, II, 38). Allama Iqbal’s references to Alexander’s
Space, Time and Deity, in the suﬁstic account of space and
time in the present Lecture as also in his address earlier: ‘A
Plea for Deeper Study of Muslim Scientists’ (Speeches,
Writings and Statements, p. 142) coupled with his
commendatory observations on Alexander’s work in his
letter dated 24 January 1921 addressed to R. A. Nicholson
(Letters of Iqbal, p. 141) are suggestive of Allama’s keen
interest in the metaphysical  views of Alexander.

Of all the British philosophers, contemporaries of Allama
Iqbal, Alexander can be singled out for laying equal
emphasis on space and time as central to all philosophy. ‘All
the vital problems of philosophy’,  says Alexander, ‘depend
for their solution on the  solution of the problem what Space
and Time are and, more particularly, in how they are related
to each other’. According to Allama Iqbal, ‘In [Muslim]  . . .
culture the problem of space and time becomes a question
of life and death’ (p. 105).  ‘Space and Time in Muslim
Thought’ was the subject selected by Allama for his
proposed Rhodes Memorial Lectures at Oxford (1934-1935)
(cf. Letters of Iqbal, pp.135-36 and 183; also Relics of Allama
Iqbal: Catalogue, Letter II, 70 dated 27 May 1935 from
Secretary, Rhodes Trust) which very unfortunately he could
not deliver owing to his increasing ill  health. A letter dated 6
May 1937 addressed to Dr Syed Zafarul Hasan of Aligarh
Muslim University (author of the well-known Realism, 1928),
discovered only recently, shows that Allama Iqbal had
already gathered ‘material’  for his Rhodes Memorial

219
Lectures; cf. Rafâal-Dân Ha`shimi`, ‘Allamah Iqbal ke Chand
Ghair Mudawwan KhuÇëÇ’, Iqbal Review, XXIII/iv (January
1983), 41-43.
Attention may be called here also to an obviously unﬁnished
two-page draft on ‘The Problem of Time in Muslim
Philosophy’ in Allama’s own hand preserved in the Allama
Iqbal Museum, Lahore; cf. Dr Ahmad Nabi Khan, Relics of
Allama Iqbal: Catalogue, I, 37.

38. Cf. Gh«yat al-Imk«n ﬁ Dir«yat al-Mak«n, pp. 16-17;
English trans., p. 13.
 39. Ibid., p. 50; English trans., p. 36.
 40. This is a reference to the Quranic verses: 6:6; 9:39;
17:16-17; 18:59; 21:11; 22:45;  36:31.

God’s judgment on nations, also called ‘judgment in
history’, according to the  Qur’«n is said to be more
relentless than God’s judgment on individuals - in the latter
case God is forgiving and compassionate. Nations are
destroyed only for their transgression and evil  doings. And
when a nation perishes, its good members meet the same
doom as its bad ones for the former failed to check the
spread of evil (11:116), cf. F. Rahman, Major Themes of the
Qur’«n, p. 53.

41. See also Quranic verses 15:5 and 24:43.
 42. For very special circumstances under which a keen
sense of history grew in Islam, see I. H. Qureshi,
‘Historiography’, A History of Muslim Philosophy, II, 1197-
1203.

43. Abë ‘Abdullah Muhammad b. Ish«q (d. c. 150/767) has
the distinction of being  the ﬁrst biographer of the  Holy
Prophet. His work Kit«b Sirat Rasël All«h (‘The Life of the
Apostle of God’) has, however, been lost and is now known
only through Ibn Hish«m’s recension of it.

220
44. Abë Ja‘far Muhammad b. Jarâr al-ñabarâ is one of the
greatest Muslim historians. His remarkably accurate
monumental history Kit«b Akhb«r al-Rusël wa’l-Mulëk
(‘Annals of the Apostles and the Kings’), the ﬁrst
comprehensive work in the Arabic language, has been
edited M. J. de Goeje and others in 15 volumes (Leiden,
1879-1901). Al-Tabarâ is equally well known for his
commendable commentary on the Qur’«n: J«mi’ al-Bay«n
‘an T«wâl al-Qur’«n in 30 volumes - a primal work for the
later commentators because of its earliest  and largest
collection of the exegetical traditions.

45. Abë’l-Hasan ‘Ali b. al-Husain b. ‘Alâ al-Mas’ëdi (d. c.
346/957), after al-Tabari`, is the next greatest historian  in
Islam - rightly named as the ‘Herodotus of the  Arabs’. He
inaugurated a new method in the writing  of history: instead
of grouping events around years (annalistic method) he
grouped them around kings, dynasties and topics (topical
method); a method adopted also by Ibn Khaldu`n. His
historico-geographical work Murëj alDhahab wa’l-Ma‘«din al-
Jauhar (‘Meadows of Gold and Mines of Gems’) also deals
with Persian, Roman and Jewish history and religion.

46. Reference is to the Quranic verses 4:1; 6:98; 7:189;
39:6.

47. See Robert Flint, History of the Philosophy of History, p.
86. Flint’s eulogy of Ibn Khaldën, expressive of his sentiment
of a discovery of a genius, now stands more or less
conﬁrmed by the realistic assessments made of Ibn Khaldën
by eminent scholars such as A. Toynbee, A Study of History,
III, 322; Sarton, op. cit., III, 1262; Gaston Bouthoul in his
Preface to de Slane’s Les Prolegomenes d’Ibn Khaldoun
(second edition, Paris, 1934-38) and R. Brunschvig, La
Berberie orientale sous les Hafsides, II, 391.

221
48. Cf. Muqaddimah, trans. F. Rosenthal, III, 246-58, also M.
Fakhry, A History of Islamic PhilosophyA History of Islamic
Philosophy 64.
 49. Phenomenon of the alternation of day and night is
spoken of in many verses of the Qur’«n such as 2:164;
3:190; 10:6; 23:80; 45:5.
 50. Ibid., 55:29.
 51. Cf. p. 107. 52. Cf. p. 106.
 53. On the notion of time as held by Zeno, Plato, Heraclitus
and Stoics, cf. A. J. Gunn, The Problem of Time, pp. 19-22.
 54. Cf. O. Spengler, The Decline of the West, II, 189-323.
 55. Cf. Lecture I, p. 3, Lecture III, p. 56 and p. 102.
 56. Cf. Spengler, op. cit., II, 248-55.
 57. Ibid., pp. 235, 240; cf. also note 33 in Lecture IV.
 58. Ibid., p. 238.
 59. Ibid.
 60. Ibid., pp. 206-07.

61. Cf. Muqaddimah, Chapter III, section 51: ‘The Fatimid . . .
‘, trans. Rosenthal, II, 156-200. Ibn Khaldu`n recounts
formally twenty-four  traditions bearing upon the  belief in
Mahdi (none of which is from Bukh«râ or Muslim) and
questions the authenticity  of them all. Cf. also the article ‘al-
Mahdi`’ in Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam and P. K. Hitti,
History of the Arabs, pp. 439-49, for the religio-political
background of the imam-mahdi idea.

Reference may also be made to Allama Iqbal’s letter dated 7
April 1932 to Muhammad Ahsan wherein, among other
things, he states that, according to  his ﬁrm belief (‘aqâdah),
all traditions relating  to mahdâ, masâhâyat and
mujaddidâyat are the product  of Persian and non-Arab
imagination; and he adds that certainly  they have nothing
to do with the true  spirit of the Qur’«n (Iqb«ln«mah, II, 231).

222
And ﬁnally it shall be rewarding to read this  last paragraph
in conjunction with Allama’s important  notes on the back
cover of his own copy of Spengler’s Decline of the West,
facsimile of which is reproduced in Descriptive Catalogue of
Allama Iqbal’s Personal Library, Plate No. 33.

The Principle   of  Movement   in  the  Structure   of  Islam
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal

As a cultural movement Islam rejects the old static  view of
the universe, and reaches a dynamic view. As an emotional
system of uniﬁcation it  recognizes the worth of the
individual as such, and rejects blood-relationship as a basis
of human unity. Blood-relationship is earthrootedness. The
search for a purely psychological foundation of human unity
becomes possible only with the perception that  all human
life is spiritual in its  origin.1 Such a perception is creative of
fresh loyalties without any ceremonial  to keep them alive,
and makes it possible for man to emancipate himself from
the earth. Christianity  which had originally appeared as a
monastic order was tried by Constantine as a system of
uniﬁcation.2 Its failure to work as such a system drove the
Emperor Julian3 to return to the old gods of Rome on which
he attempted to  put philosophical interpretations.  A modern
historian of civilization has thus depicted  the state of the
civilized world about the time  when Islam appeared on the
stage of History: 
It seemed then that the  great civilization that  it had taken
four thousand years to construct was on the verge of
disintegration, and that  mankind was likely to return to  that
condition of barbarism where every tribe  and sect was
against the next, and law and order were unknown . . . The
old tribal sanctions had lost their  power. Hence the old
imperial methods would no longer operate. The new
sanctions created by Christianity were working division and
destruction instead of unity  and order. It was a time fraught

223
with tragedy. Civilization, like a gigantic tree whose foliage
had overarched the world and whose branches had borne
the golden fruits of art  and science and literature, stood
tottering, its  trunk no longer alive with the  ﬂowing sap of
devotion and reverence, but rotted to  the core, riven by the
storms of war, and held together only by the  cords of
ancient customs and laws, that might snap at any moment.
Was there any emotional culture that could be brought in,  to
gather mankind once more into unity  and to save
civilization? This culture must be something of a new type,
for the old sanctions and ceremonials were dead, and to
build up others of the same kind would be the work  of
centuries.’4

The writer then proceeds to tell us that  the world stood in
need of a new culture to take the place of the culture  of the
throne, and the systems of uniﬁcation which were based on
bloodrelationship. It is amazing, he adds, that such a culture
should have arisen from Arabia just at the time when it  was
most needed. There is, however, nothing amazing in the
phenomenon. The world-life intuitively sees its own needs,
and at critical moments deﬁnes its own direction.  This is
what, in the language of religion, we call prophetic
revelation. It is only natural that  Islam should have ﬂashed
across the consciousness of a simple people untouched by
any of the ancient cultures, and occupying a geographical
position where three continents meet together.  The new
culture ﬁnds the foundation of world-unity  in the principle  of
Tauhâd.’5 Islam, as a polity, is only a practical means of
making this principle a living factor  in the intellectual  and
emotional life of mankind. It demands loyalty  to God, not to
thrones. And since God is the ultimate spiritual basis of all
life, loyalty to God virtually  amounts to man’s loyalty  to his
own ideal nature. The ultimate spiritual  basis of all life, as
conceived by Islam, is eternal and reveals itself in variety
and change. A society based on such a conception of Reality

224
must reconcile, in its life, the  categories of permanence and
change. It must possess eternal principles to regulate its
collective life, for the  eternal gives us a foothold in the world
of perpetual change. But eternal principles when they  are
understood to exclude all possibilities of change which,
according to the Qur’«n, is one of the greatest ‘signs’  of
God, tend to immobilize what is essentially mobile in  its
nature. The failure of the Europe in political and social
sciences illustrates the former principle,  the immobility  of
Islam during the last ﬁve hundred  years illustrates the latter.
What then is the principle of movement  in the structure  of
Islam? This is known as Ijtih«d.

The word literally means to exert. In the  terminology of
Islamic law it means to exert with  a view to form an
independent judgement on a legal question. The idea, I
believe, has its origin in a well-known verse of the Qur’«n -
‘And to those who exert We show Our path’.6 We ﬁnd it
more deﬁnitely adumbrated  in a tradition of the  Holy
Prophet. When Mu‘«dh was appointed ruler of Yemen, the
Prophet is reported to have asked him as to how he would
decide matters coming up before him. ‘I  will judge matters
according to the Book of God,’ said Mu‘«dh. ‘But if the Book
of God contains nothing to guide you?’ ‘Then I will act on
the precedents of the Prophet of God.’ ‘But if the precedents
fail?’ ‘Then I will exert to form  my own judgement.’7 The
student of the history  of Islam, however, is well aware that
with the political  expansion of Islam systematic legal
thought became an absolute necessity, and our early
doctors of law, both of Arabian and non-Arabian descent,
worked ceaselessly until all the accumulated wealth of legal
thought found a ﬁnal expression in our recognized schools
of Law. These schools of Law recognize three degrees of
Ijtih«d: (1) complete authority  in legislation which  is
practically conﬁned to be founders of the  schools, (2)
relative authority  which is to be exercised within the limits

225
of a particular school, and (3) special authority which  relates
to the determining of the  law applicable to a particular case
left undetermined by the  founders.8 In this paper I am
concerned with the ﬁrst degree of Ijtih«d  only, i.e. complete
authority in legislation.  The theoretical possibility of this
degree of Ijtih«d is admitted by the  Sunni`s, but in practice
it has always been denied ever since the establishment of
the schools, inasmuch as the idea of complete Ijtih«d is
hedged round by conditions which are well-nigh impossible
of realization in a single individual. Such an attitude seems
exceedingly strange in a system of law based mainly on the
groundwork provided by the Qur’«n which embodies an
essentially dynamic outlook on life. It is, therefore,
necessary, before we proceed farther, to discover the cause
of this intellectual attitude  which has reduced the Law of
Islam practically to a state of immobility.  Some European
writers think that  the stationary character  of the Law of
Islam is due to the inﬂuence of the Turks. This is an entirely
superﬁcial view, for the legal schools of Islam had been
ﬁnally established long before the Turkish inﬂuence began
to work in the history of Islam. The real causes are, in my
opinion, as follows:

1. We are all familiar with the Rationalist movement which
appeared in the church of Islam during the early days of the
Abbasids and the bitter controversies which it raised. Take
for instance the one important  point of controversy between
the two camps - the conservative dogma of the eternity  of
the Qur’«n. The Rationalists denied it because they thought
that this was only another form  of the Christian dogma of
the eternity of the  word; on the other hand, the
conservative thinkers whom the later Abbasids, fearing the
political implications of Rationalism, gave their  full support,
thought that by  denying the eternity  of the Qur’«n the
Rationalists were undermining the very foundations of
Muslim society.9 Naïï«m, for instance, practically rejected

226
the traditions, and openly declared Abë Hurairah to be an
untrustworthy reporter.10 Thus, partly owing to a
misunderstanding of the ultimate  motives of Rationalism,
and partly owing to the unrestrained  thought of particular
Rationalists, conservative thinkers regarded this movement
as a force of disintegration, and considered it a danger to
the stability of Islam as a social polity.11 Their main purpose,
therefore, was to preserve the social integrity  of Islam, and
to realize this the only course open to them was to utilize
the binding force of Sharâ‘ah, and to make the structure  of
their legal system as rigorous as possible.

2. The rise and growth of ascetic Suﬁsm, which gradually
developed under inﬂuences of a non-Islamic character, a
purely speculative side, is to a large extent responsible for
this attitude. On its purely  religious side Suﬁsm fostered a
kind of revolt against the verbal  quibbles of our early
doctors. The case of Sufy«n Thaurâ is an instance in point.
He was one of the acutest legal minds of his time, and was
nearly the founder of a school of law,12 but being also
intensely spiritual, the dry-as-dust subtleties  of
contemporary legists drove him to ascetic Suﬁsm. On its
speculative side which developed later, Suﬁsm is a form of
freethought and in alliance with Rationalism. The emphasis
that it laid on the  distinction of ï«hir and b«Çin (Appearance
and Reality) created an attitude of indiﬀerence  to all that
applies to Appearance and not to Reality.13

This spirit of total other-wordliness in later Suﬁsm obscured
men’s vision of a very important  aspect of Islam as a social
polity, and, oﬀering the prospect  of unrestrained thought on
its speculative side, it attracted  and ﬁnally absorbed the
best minds in Islam. The Muslim state was thus left
generally in the hands of intellectual  mediocrities, and the
unthinking masses of Islam, having no personalities of a

227
higher calibre to guide them, found their  security only in
blindly following the schools.

3. On the top of all this came the destruction  of Baghdad -
the centre of Muslim intellectual life  - in the middle of the
thirteenth century. This was indeed a great blow, and all the
contemporary historians of the invasion of Tartars describe
the havoc of Baghdad with a halfsuppressed pessimism
about the future of Islam. For fear of further  disintegration,
which is only natural in such a period of political decay, the
conservative thinkers of Islam focused all their eﬀorts  on the
one point of preserving a uniform social life for the  people
by a jealous exclusion of all innovations in the law of
Sharâ‘ah as expounded by the early doctors of Islam. Their
leading idea was social order, and there is no doubt that
they were partly right,  because organization does to a
certain extent counteract  the forces of decay. But they did
not see, and our modern ‘Ulem« do not see, that the
ultimate fate of a people does not depend so much on
organization as on the worth and power of individual men.
In an over-organized society the individual is altogether
crushed out of existence. He gains the whole wealth of
social thought around him and loses his own soul. Thus a
false reverence for past history and its artiﬁcial  resurrection
constitute no remedy for a people’s decay. ‘The verdict of
history’, as a modern writer has happily put  it, ‘is that  worn-
out ideas have never risen to power among a people who
have worn them out.’ The only eﬀective  power, therefore,
that counteracts the forces of decay in a people is the
rearing of self-concentrated individuals. Such individuals
alone reveal the depth of life. They disclose new standards
in the light of which we begin to  see that our environment is
not wholly inviolable and requires revision. The tendency to
overorganization by a false reverence of the past, as
manifested in the legists of Islam in the  thirteenth century
and later, was contrary to the inner  impulse of Islam, and

228
consequently invoked the powerful reaction of Ibn
Taimâyyah, one of the most indefatigable writers and
preachers of Islam, who was born in 1263, ﬁve years after
the destruction of Baghdad.

Ibn Taimâyyah was brought up in Hanbalite tradition.
Claiming freedom of Ijtih«d for himself he rose in revolt
against the ﬁnality of the  schools, and went back to ﬁrst
principles in order to make a fresh start. Like Ibn Àazm - the
founder of Ê«hirâschool of law14 - he rejected the Hanaﬁte
principle of reasoning by analogy and Ijm«’ as understood
by older legists;15 for he thought agreement was the basis
of all superstition.16 And there is no doubt that, considering
the moral and intellectual decrepitude  of his times, he was
right in doing so. In the sixteenth  century Suyëtâ claimed
the same privilege of Ijtih«d to  which he added the idea of a
renovator at the beginning of each century.17 But the spirit
of Ibn Taimâyyah’s teaching found a fuller expression in a
movement of immense potentialities  which arose in the
eighteenth century, from  the sands of Nejd, described by
Macdonald as the ‘cleanest spot in the decadent world of
Islam’. It is really the ﬁrst  throb of life in modern Islam. To
the inspiration of this movement  are traceable, directly or
indirectly, nearly all the  great modern movements of Muslim
Asia and Africa, e.g. the Sanâsâ movement, the Pan-Islamic
movement,18 and the B«bâ movement, which is only a
Persian reﬂex of Arabian Protestantism. The great puritan
reformer, Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahh«h, who was born in
1700,19 studied in Medina, travelled in Persia, and ﬁnally
succeeded in spreading the ﬁre of his restless soul
throughout the whole world of Islam. He was similar in spirit
to Ghazz«lâ’s disciple, Muhammad Ibn Tëmart20 - the Berber
puritan reformer of Islam who appeared amidst the decay of
Muslim Spain, and gave her a fresh inspiration. We are,
however, not concerned with the political  career of this

229
movement which was terminated by the  armies of
Muhammad ‘Alâ P«sh«. The essential thing to note is the
spirit of freedom manifested in it,  though inwardly this
movement, too, is conservative in its own fashion. While it
rises in revolt against the ﬁnality  of the schools, and
vigorously asserts the right of private  judgement, its vision
of the past is wholly uncritical, and in  matters of law it
mainly falls back on the traditions of  the Prophet.

Passing on to Turkey, we ﬁnd that the idea of Ijtih«d,
reinforced and broadened by modern philosophical ideas,
has long been working in the religious and political thought
of the Turkish nation. This is clear from Àalim S«bit’s new
theory of Muhammadan Law, grounded on modern
sociological concepts. If the renaissance of Islam is a fact,
and I believe it is a fact, we too one day, like the Turks, will
have to re-evaluate our intellectual  inheritance. And if we
cannot make any original contribution to  the general
thought of Islam, we may, by healthy  conservative criticism,
serve at least as a check on the rapid movement of
liberalism in the world of Islam.

I now proceed to give you some idea of religio-political
thought in Turkey which will indicate to you how the power
of Ijtih«d is manifested in recent thought  and activity  in that
country. There were, a short time ago, two main lines of
thought in Turkey represented by the Nationalist Party and
the Party of Religious Reform. The point of supreme interest
with the Nationalist Party is above all the State and not
Religion. With these thinkers religion as such has no
independent function. The state is the essential factor in
national life which determines the  character and function of
all other factors. They, therefore, reject old ideas about the
function of State and Religion, and accentuate the
separation of Church and State. Now the structure of Islam
as a religio-political system, no doubt, does permit such a

230
view, though personally I think it  is a mistake to suppose
that the idea of state is more dominant  and rules all other
ideas embodied in the system of Islam. In Islam the spiritual
and the temporal are not two distinct  domains, and the
nature of an act, however secular in its import,  is
determined by the attitude  of mind with  which the agent
does it. It is the invisible mental background  of the act
which ultimately determines  its character.21 An act is
temporal or profane if it  is done in a spirit of detachment
from the inﬁnite complexity  of life behind it;  it is spiritual if  it
is inspired by that complexity. In Islam it is the same reality
which appears as Church looked at from one point of view
and State from another. It is not true to say that  Church and
State are two sides or facets of the same thing. Islam is a
single unanalysable reality which is one or the other as your
point of view varies. The point is extremely far-reaching and
a full elucidation of it will  involve us in a highly philosophical
discussion. Suﬃce it to say that this ancient mistake arose
out of the bifurcation of the  unity of man into  two distinct
and separate realities which somehow have a point of
contact, but which are in essence opposed to each other.
The truth, however, is that matter  is spirit in space-time
reference. The unity called man is body when you look at it
as acting in regard to what we call the external  world; it is
mind or soul when you look at it as acting in regard to  the
ultimate aim and ideal of such acting. The essence of
Tauhâd, as a working idea, is equality, solidarity, and
freedom. The state, from the Islamic standpoint, is an
endeavour to transform these ideal principles into  space-
time forces, an aspiration to realize them in a deﬁnite
human organization. It is in this sense alone that the state  in
Islam is a theocracy, not in the sense that it is headed by a
representative of God on earth who can always screen his
despotic will behind his supposed infallibility. The critics of
Islam have lost sight of this important  consideration. The

231
Ultimate Reality, according to the Qur’«n, is spiritual, and its
life consists in its temporal activity.  The spirit ﬁnds its
opportunities in the natural,  the material, the  secular. All
that is secular is, therefore, sacred in the roots of its being.
The greatest service that modern thought has rendered to
Islam, and as a matter of fact to all religion,  consists in its
criticism of what we call material  or natural - a criticism
which discloses that the merely material has no substance
until we discover it rooted in the  spiritual. There is no such
thing as a profane world. All this immensity of matter
constitutes a scope for the self-realization of spirit. All is holy
ground. As the Prophet so beautifully puts it: ‘The whole of
this earth is a mosque.’22 The state, according to Islam, is
only an eﬀort to realize the spiritual  in a human
organization. But in this sense all state, not based on mere
domination and aiming at the realization  of ideal principles,
is theocratic.

The truth is that the Turkish Nationalists assimilated the
idea of the separation of Church and State from the history
of European political ideas. Primitive Christianity was
founded, not as a political or civil unit,  but as a monastic
order in a profane world, having nothing to do with  civil
aﬀairs, and obeying the Roman authority practically  in all
matters. The result of this was that when the  State became
Christian, State and Church confronted each other as
distinct powers with interminable  boundary disputes
between them. Such a thing could never happen in Islam;
for Islam was from the very beginning a civil society,  having
received from the Qur’«n a set of simple legal principles
which, like the twelve tables of the  Romans, carried, as
experience subsequently proved, great potentialities  of
expansion and development by interpretation.  The
Nationalist theory of state, therefore,  is misleading
inasmuch as it suggests a dualism which does not exist in
Islam.

232
The Religious Reform Party, on the other hand, led by Sa‘âd
Àalâm P«sh«, insisted on the fundamental fact that Islam is
a harmony of idealism and positivism; and, as a unity of the
eternal verities of freedom, equality,  and solidarity, has no
fatherland. ‘As there is no English Mathematics, German
Astronomy or French Chemistry,’ says the Grand Vizier, ‘so
there is no Turkish, Arabian, Persian or Indian Islam. Just as
the universal character of scientiﬁc truths  engenders
varieties of scientiﬁc national cultures  which in their totality
represent human knowledge, much in the same way the
universal character of Islamic verities creates varieties of
national, moral and social ideals.’ Modern culture based as it
is on national egoism is, according to this keen-sighted
writer, only another form  of barbarism. It is the result of an
over-developed industrialism through which men satisfy
their primitive  instincts and inclinations. He, however,
deplores that during the course of history the  moral and
social ideals of Islam have been gradually deislamized
through the inﬂuence of local character, and pre-Islamic
superstitions of Muslim nations. These ideals today are more
Iranian, Turkish, or Arabian than Islamic. The pure brow of
the principle of Tauhâd has received more or less an impress
of heathenism, and the universal and impersonal character
of the ethical ideals of Islam has been lost through a process
of localization. The only alternative open to us, then, is to
tear oﬀ from Islam the hard crust  which has immobilized an
essentially dynamic outlook on life, and to rediscover the
original verities of freedom, equality,  and solidarity with a
view to rebuild our moral, social, and political ideals out  of
their original simplicity  and universality. Such are the views
of the Grand Vizier of Turkey. You will see that following a
line of thought more in tune  with the spirit of  Islam, he
reaches practically the same conclusion as the Nationalist
Party, that is to say, the freedom of Ijtih«d with  a view to
rebuild the laws of Sharâ‘ah in the light of modern  thought
and experience.

233
Let us now see how the Grand National Assembly has
exercised this power of Ijtih«d in regard to the institution  of
Khil«fat. According to Sunni Law, the appointment of an
Imam or Khalâfah is absolutely indispensable. The ﬁrst
question that arises in this connexion is this - Should the
Caliphate be vested in a single person? Turkey’s Ijtih«d is
that according to the spirit  of Islam the Caliphate or
Imamate can be vested in a body of persons, or an elected
Assembly. The religious doctors of Islam in Egypt and India,
as far as I know, have not yet expressed themselves on this
point. Personally, I believe the Turkish view is perfectly
sound. It is hardly necessary to argue this point. The
republican form of government is not only  thoroughly
consistent with the spirit  of Islam, but has also become a
necessity in view of the new forces that are set free in the
world of Islam. 
In order to understand the Turkish view let us seek the
guidance of Ibn Khaldën - the ﬁrst philosophical historian of
Islam. Ibn Khaldën, in his famous ‘Prolegomena’, mentions
three distinct views of the idea of Universal Caliphate in
Islam23: (1) That Universal Imamate is a Divine institution,
and is consequently indispensable. (2) That it is merely a
matter of expediency. (3) That there is no need of such an
institution. The last view was taken by the  Khaw«rij.24 It
seems that modern Turkey has shifted from the ﬁrst to the
second view, i.e. to the view of the Mu’tazilah who regarded
Universal Imamate as a matter of expediency only. The
Turks argue that in our political thinking we must be guided
by our past political experience which points unmistakably
to the fact that  the idea of Universal Imamate has failed in
practice. It was a workable idea when the Empire of Islam
was intact. Since the break-up of this Empire independent
political units have arisen. The idea has ceased to be
operative and cannot work as a living factor in the
organization of modern Islam. Far from serving any useful

234
purpose it has really stood in the way of a reunion of
independent Muslim States. Persia has stood aloof from the
Turks in view of her doctrinal diﬀerences regarding the
Khil«fat; Morocco has always looked askance at them, and
Arabia has cherished private ambition. And all these
ruptures in Islam for the sake of a mere symbol of a power
which departed long ago. Why should we not, they can
further argue, learn from experience in our political
thinking? Did not Q«dâ Abë Bakr B«qil«nâ drop the condition
of Qarshâyat in the Khalâfah in view of the facts of
experience, i.e. the political fall of the  Quraish and their
consequent inability to rule the  world of Islam? Centuries
ago Ibn Khaldën, who personally believed in the condition of
Qarshâyat in the Khali`fah, argued much in the same way.
Since the power of the Quraish, he says, has gone, there is
no alternative but to  accept the most powerful man as
Ima`m in the country  where he happens to be powerful.
Thus Ibn Khaldën, realizing the hard logic of facts, suggests
a view which may be regarded as the ﬁrst dim vision of an
International Islam fairly in sight  today. Such is the attitude
of the modern Turk, inspired as he is by the realities of
experience, and not by the scholastic reasoning of jurists
who lived and thought under diﬀerent  conditions of life.

To my mind these arguments, if rightly appreciated, indicate
the birth of an International  ideal which, though forming the
very essence of Islam, has been hitherto over-shadowed or
rather displaced by Arabian Imperialism of the earlier
centuries of Islam. This new ideal is clearly reﬂected in the
work of the great nationalist  poet Êiy« whose songs,
inspired by the philosophy of Auguste Comte, have done a
great deal in shaping the present thought  of Turkey. I
reproduce the substance of one of his poems from Professor
Fischer’s German translation:

235
In order to create a really eﬀective political  unity of Islam,
all Muslim countries must ﬁrst become independent:  and
then in their totality  they should range themselves under
one Caliph. Is such a thing possible at the present moment?
If not today, one must wait. In the  meantime the Caliph
must reduce his own house to order and lay the foundations
of a workable modern State.

‘In the International world the  weak ﬁnd no sympathy;
power alone deserves respect.’25

These lines clearly indicate the trend of modern Islam. For
the present every Muslim nation must sink into  her own
deeper self, temporarily focus her vision on herself alone,
until all are strong and powerful to form  a living family of
republics. A true and living unity, according to  the
nationalist thinkers, is not so easy as to be achieved by a
merely symbolical overlordship. It is truly  manifested in a
multiplicity  of free independent units whose racial rivalries
are adjusted and harmonized by the unifying bond of a
common spiritual aspiration. It seems to me that  God is
slowly bringing home to us the truth  that Islam is neither
Nationalism nor Imperialism but a League of Nations which
recognizes artiﬁcial boundaries and racial distinctions for
facility of reference only,26 and not for restricting the social
horizon of its members.

From the same poet the following passage from a poem
called ‘Religion and Science’ will throw some further light on
the general religious outlook which is being gradually
shaped in the world of Islam today:

"Who were the ﬁrst spiritual leaders of mankind? Without
doubt the prophets and holy men. In every period religion
has led philosophy; From it alone morality and art receive
light. But then religion grows weak, and loses her original

236
ardour! Holy men disappear, and spiritual leadership
becomes, in name, the heritage of the Doctors of Law! The
leading star of the Doctors of Law is tradition; They drag
religion with force on this track;  but philosophy says: ‘My
leading star is reason: you go right, I go left."

‘Both religion and philosophy claim the soul of man and
draw it on either side!’

‘When this struggle is going on pregnant experience
delivers up positive science, and this young leader of
thought says, "Tradition is history and Reason is the method
of history! Both interpret  and desire to reach the same
indeﬁnable something!"

‘But what is this something?’ ‘Is it  a spiritualized heart?’
 ‘If so, then take my last word - Religion is positive science,
the purpose of which is to spiritualize the heart  of man!’27

It is clear from these lines how beautifully the  poet has
adopted the Comtian idea of the three stages of man’s
intellectual development, i.e.  theological, metaphysical and
scientiﬁc - to the religious outlook of  Islam. And the view of
religion embodied in these lines determines the poet’s
attitude towards the  position of Arabic in the educational
system of Turkey. He says:

‘The land where the call to prayer resounds in Turkish;
where those who pray understand the meaning of their
religion; the land where the Qur’«n is learnt in  Turkish;
where every man, big or small, knows full well the command
of God; O! Son of Turkey! that land is thy fatherland!’28

If the aim of religion is the spiritualization  of the heart, then
it must penetrate the  soul of man, and it can best penetrate
the inner man, according to the poet, only  if its spiritualizing

237
ideas are clothed in his mother tongue. Most people in India
will condemn this displacement of Arabic by Turkish. For
reasons which will appear later the poet’s Ijtih«d  is open to
grave objections, but it must be admitted  that the  reform
suggested by him is not without a parallel  in the past history
of Islam. We ﬁnd that when Muhammad Ibn Tëmart - the
Mahdi of Muslim Spain - who was Berber by nationality,
came to power, and established the pontiﬁcal rule of  the
MuwaÁÁidën, he ordered for the sake of the illiterate
Berbers, that the Qur’«n should be translated and read in
the Berber language; that the call to  prayer should be given
in Berber;29 and that all the functionaries of the Church
must know the Berber language. In another passage the
poet gives his ideal of womanhood. In his zeal for the
equality of man and woman he wishes to see radical
changes in the family law of Islam as it is understood and
practised today:

‘There is the woman, my mother, my sister, or my  daughter;
it is she who calls up the most sacred emotions from the
depths of my life! There is my beloved, my sun, my moon
and my star; it is she who makes me understand the poetry
of life! How could the Holy Law of God regard these
beautiful creatures as despicable beings? Surely there is an
error in the interpretation  of the Qur’«n by the learned?30

‘The foundation of the nation and the state  is the family!’ 
‘As long as the full worth of the woman is not realized,
national life remains incomplete.’  ‘The upbringing of the
family must correspond with justice;’ 
‘Therefore equality is necessary in three things - in divorce,
in separation, and in inheritance.’ ‘As long as the woman is
counted half the man as regards inheritance and one-fourth
of man in matrimony, neither  the family nor the  country will
be elevated. For other rights we have opened national
courts of justice;’ 

238
‘he family, on the other  hand, we have left in the hands of
schools.’ 
I do not know why we have left the woman in the  lurch?
Does she not work for the land? Or, will she turn her needle
into a sharp bayonet to tear oﬀ  her rights from our hands
through a revolution?31

The truth is that among the Muslim nations of today,  Turkey
alone has shaken oﬀ its dogmatic slumber, and attained to
self-consciousness. She alone has claimed her right of
intellectual freedom; she alone has passed from the ideal to
the real - a transition which entails keen intellectual  and
moral struggle. To her the growing complexities of a mobile
and broadening life are sure to bring new situations
suggesting new points of view, and necessitating fresh
interpretations of principles which are only  of an academic
interest to a people who have never experienced the joy of
spiritual expansion. It is, I think, the English thinker  Hobbes
who makes this acute observation that to have a succession
of identical thoughts and feelings is to have no thoughts  and
feelings at all. Such is the lot of most Muslim countries
today. They are mechanically repeating old values, whereas
the Turk is on the way to creating new values. He has
passed through great experiences which have revealed his
deeper self to him. In him life has begun to move, change,
and amplify, giving birth  to new desires, bringing new
diﬃculties and suggesting new interpretations.  The question
which confronts him today, and which is likely to confront
other Muslim countries in the near future  is whether the Law
of Islam is capable of evolution - a question which will
require great intellectual eﬀort,  and is sure to be answered
in the aﬃrmative,  provided the world of Islam approaches it
in the spirit of ‘Umar - the ﬁrst  critical and independent
mind in Islam who, at the last moments of  the Prophet, had
the moral courage to utter  these remarkable words: ‘The
Book of God is suﬃcient for us.’32

239
We heartily welcome the liberal movement  in modern Islam,
but it must also be admitted  that the  appearance of liberal
ideas in Islam constitutes also the most critical  moment in
the history of Islam. Liberalism has a tendency to act as a
force of disintegration, and the  race-idea which appears to
be working in modern Islam with greater  force than ever
may ultimately  wipe oﬀ the broad human outlook which
Muslim people have imbibed from their religion.  Further, our
religious and political reformers in their  zeal for liberalism
may overstep the proper limits  of reform in the absence of
check on their youthful fervour.  We are today passing
through a period similar to that  of the Protestant revolution
in Europe, and the lesson which the rise and outcome of
Luther’s movement teaches should not be lost on us. A
careful reading of history shows that the  Reformation was
essentially a political movement,  and the net result of it  in
Europe was a gradual displacement of the universal ethics
of Christianity by systems of national  ethics.33 The result of
this tendency we have seen with our own eyes in the Great
European War which, far from bringing any workable
synthesis of the two opposing systems of ethics, has made
the European situation still more intolerable.  It is the duty of
the leaders of the world of Islam today to  understand the
real meaning of what has happened in Europe, and then to
move forward with self-control and a clear insight  into the
ultimate aims of Islam as a social polity.

I have given you some idea of the history and working of
Ijtih«d in modern Islam. I now proceed to see whether the
history and structure of the  Law of Islam indicate the
possibility of any fresh interpretation  of its principles. In
other words, the question that  I want to raise is - Is the Law
of Islam capable of evolution? Horten, Professor of Semitic
Philology at the University of Bonn, raises the same
question in connexion with the Philosophy and Theology of
Islam. Reviewing the work of Muslim thinkers in the sphere

240
of purely religious thought he points out  that the history  of
Islam may aptly be described as a gradual interaction,
harmony, and mutual deepening of two distinct  forces, i.e.
the element of Aryan culture and knowledge on the one
hand, and a Semitic religion on the other. The Muslim has
always adjusted his religious outlook to the elements of
culture which he assimilated from the peoples that
surrounded him. From 800 to 1100, says Horten, not less
than one hundred systems of theology appeared in Islam, a
fact which bears ample testimony to the  elasticity of Islamic
thought as well as to the ceaseless activity of our early
thinkers. Thus, in view of the revelations of a deeper study
of Muslim literature and thought,  this living European
Orientalist has been driven to the following conclusion:

The spirit of Islam is so broad that it is practically boundless.
With the exception of atheistic ideas alone it has assimilated
all the attainable ideas of surrounding peoples, and given
them its own peculiar direction of development.’

The assimilative spirit of Islam is even more manifest in the
sphere of law. Says Professor Hurgronje - the Dutch critic of
Islam:

When we read the history of the development of
Mohammadan Law we ﬁnd that, on the one hand, the
doctors of every age, on the slightest stimulus, condemn
one another to the point of mutual  accusations of heresy;
and, on the other hand, the very same people, with greater
and greater unity of purpose, try  to reconcile the similar
quarrels of their predecessors.’

These views of modern European critics of Islam make it
perfectly clear that, with  the return of new life,  the inner
catholicity of the spirit  of Islam is bound to work itself out in
spite of the rigorous conservatism of our doctors. And I have

241
no doubt that a deeper study of the  enormous legal
literature of Islam is sure to rid the  modern critic of the
superﬁcial opinion that the Law of Islam is stationary  and
incapable of development. Unfortunately, the  conservative
Muslim public of this country is not yet  quite ready for a
critical discussion of Fiqh, which, if undertaken, is likely to
displease most people, and raise sectarian controversies;
yet I venture to oﬀer a few  remarks on the point before us.

1. In the ﬁrst place, we should bear in mind that  from the
earliest times practically up to  the rise of the Abbasids,
there was no written law of Islam apart from  the Qur’«n. 
2. Secondly, it is worthy of note that from  about the middle
of the ﬁrst century  up to the beginning of the fourth  not less
than nineteen schools of law and legal opinion appeared in
Islam.34 This fact alone is suﬃcient to show how incessantly
our early doctors of law worked in order to meet the
necessities of a growing civilization. With the expansion of
conquest and the consequent widening of the outlook of
Islam these early legists had to take a wider view of things,
and to study local conditions of life and habits of new
peoples that came within the fold  of Islam. A careful study
of the various schools of legal opinion, in the light of
contemporary social and political history, reveals that  they
gradually passed from the deductive to the  inductive
attitude in their  eﬀorts at interpretation.35

3. Thirdly, when we study the four accepted sources of
Muhammadan Law and the controversies which they
invoked, the supposed rigidity of our recognized schools
evaporates and the possibility of a further  evolution
becomes perfectly clear. Let us brieﬂy discuss these
sources.

(a) The Qur’«n. The primary source of the Law of Islam is
the Qur’«n. The Qur’«n, however, is not a legal code. Its

242
main purpose, as I have said before, is to awaken in man
the higher consciousness of his relation with God and the
universe.36 No doubt, the Qur’«n does lay down a few
general principles and rules of a legal nature, especially
relating to the family37 - the ultimate  basis of social life. But
why are these rules made part of a revelation the ultimate
aim of which is man’s higher life? The answer to this
question is furnished by the history of Christianity  which
appeared as a powerful reaction against the spirit of legality
manifested in Judaism. By setting up an ideal of
otherworldliness it no doubt did succeed in spiritualizing  life,
but its individualism could see no spiritual value  in the
complexity of human social relations. ‘Primitive  Christianity’,
says Naumann in his Briefe Ü ber Religion, ‘attached no
value to the preservation of the State, law,  organization,
production. It simply does not reﬂect on the  conditions of
human society.’ And Naumann concludes: ‘Hence we either
dare to aim at being without  a state, and thus throwing
ourselves deliberately into the arms of anarchy, or we
decide to possess, alongside of our religious creed, a
political creed as well.’38 Thus the Qur’«n considers it
necessary to unite religion and state, ethics and politics in  a
single revelation much in the same way as Plato does in his
Republic.

The important point to note  in this connexion, however, is
the dynamic outlook of the Qur’«n. I have fully  discussed its
origin and history. It is obvious that with such an outlook the
Holy Book of Islam cannot be inimical to the idea of
evolution. Only we should not forget that  life is not change,
pure and simple. It has within it elements of  conservation
also. While enjoying his creative activity, and always
focusing his energies of the discovery of new vistas of life,
man has a feeling of uneasiness in the presence of his own
unfoldment. In his forward movement he cannot  help

243
looking back to his past, and faces his own inward
expansion with a certain amount of fear. The spirit of man in
its forward movement is restrained by forces which seem to
be working in the opposite direction. This is only another
way of saying that life moves with  the weight of its own past
on its back, and that in any view of social change the value
and function of the forces of conservatism cannot be lost
sight of. It is with this organic insight  into the essential
teaching of the Qur’«n that to  approach our existing
institutions. No people can aﬀord to reject their  past
entirely, for it is their  past that has made their  personal
identity. And in a society like Islam the problem of a revision
of old institutions becomes still more delicate,  and the
responsibility of the reformer assumes a far more serious
aspect. Islam is non-territorial in its character,  and its aim is
to furnish a model for the ﬁnal  combination of humanity by
drawing its adherents from a variety  of mutually repellent
races, and then transforming this atomic aggregate  into a
people possessing a self-consciousness of their own. This
was not an easy task to accomplish. Yet Islam, by means of
its well-conceived institutions, has succeeded to a very
great extent in creating something  like a collective will and
conscience in this heterogeneous mass. In the evolution of
such a society even the immutability  of socially harmless
rules relating to eating and drinking,  purity or impurity,  has
a life-value of its own, inasmuch as it tends to give such
society a speciﬁc inwardness, and further secures that
external and internal uniformity  which counteracts the
forces of heterogeneity always latent in a society of a
composite character. The critic of these institutions must,
therefore, try to secure, before he undertakes to handle
them, a clear insight into the  ultimate signiﬁcance of the
social experiment embodied in Islam. He must look at their
structure, not from the  standpoint of social advantage or
disadvantage to this or that  country, but from the  point of

244
view of the larger purpose which is being gradually worked
out in the life of mankind  as a whole.

Turning now to the groundwork of legal principles in the
Qur’«n, it is perfectly clear that  far from leaving no scope for
human thought and legislative activity  the intensive  breadth
of these principles virtually acts as an awakener of human
thought. Our early doctors of law taking their  clue mainly
from this groundwork evolved a number of legal systems;
and the student of Muhammadan history knows very well
that nearly half the triumphs  of Islam as a social and
political power were due to the legal acuteness of these
doctors. ‘Next to the Romans’, says von Kremer, ‘there is no
other nation besides the Arabs which could call its own a
system of law so carefully worked out.’ But with all  their
comprehensiveness these systems are after all individual
interpretations, and as such cannot claim any ﬁnality. I know
the ‘Ulem« of Islam claim ﬁnality for  the popular schools of
Muhammadan Law, though they never found it possible to
deny the theoretical possibility  of a complete Ijtih«d. I have
tried to explain the causes which, in my opinion, determined
this attitude of the  ‘Ulem«; but since things have changed
and the world of Islam is confronted and aﬀected today  by
new forces set free by the extraordinary development  of
human thought in all its directions,  I see no reason why this
attitude should be maintained any  longer. Did the founders
of our schools ever claim ﬁnality for their  reasonings and
interpretations? Never. The claim of the present generation
of Muslim liberals to reinterpret the  foundational legal
principles, in the light of  their own experience and the
altered conditions of modern life is, in my opinion,  perfectly
justiﬁed. The teaching of the Qur’«n that  life is a process of
progressive creation necessitates that each generation,
guided but unhampered by the work of its  predecessors,
should be permitted to solve its own problems.

245
You will, I think, remind me here of the Turkish poet Êiy«
whom I quoted a moment ago, and ask whether the equality
of man and woman demanded by him, equality, that  is to
say, in point of divorce, separation, and inheritance,  is
possible according to Muhammadan Law. I do not know
whether the awakening of women in Turkey has created
demands which cannot be met with without  a fresh
interpretation  of foundational principles. In the Punjab, as
everybody knows, there have been cases in which Muslim
women wishing to get rid of undesirable husbands have
been driven to apostasy.39 Nothing could be more distant
from the aims of a missionary religion. The Law of Islam,
says the great Spanish jurist Im«m Sh«tibâin his
alMuwaﬁq«t, aims at protecting ﬁve  things - Dân, Nafs, ‘Aql,
M«l, and Nasl.40 Applying this test I venture to ask: ‘Does
the working of the rule  relating to apostasy, as laid down in
the Hed«yah tend to protect the  interests of the Faith in this
country?’41 In view of the intense conservatism of the
Muslims of India, Indian judges cannot but stick to what are
called standard works. The result is that while the peoples
are moving the law remains stationary. With regard to the
Turkish poet’s demand, I am afraid he does not seem to
know much about the family  law of Islam. Nor does he seem
to understand the economic signiﬁcance of the  43Quranic rule of
inheritance.42 Marriage, according to Muhammadan Law, is a civil contract.

The wife at the time of marriage  is at liberty to  get the
husband’s power of divorce delegated to her on stated
conditions, and thus secure equality of divorce with  her
husband. The reform suggested by the poet relating to the
rule of inheritance is based on a misunderstanding. From
the inequality of their  legal shares it must not be supposed
that the rule assumes the superiority  of males over females.
Such an assumption would be contrary to the spirit of  Islam.
The Qur’«n says:

246
And for women are rights over men similar to those for men
over women’ (2:228).

The share of the daughter is determined not by any
inferiority inherent  in her, but in view of her economic
opportunities, and the place she occupies in the social
structure of which she is a part and parcel. Further,
according to the poet’s own theory of society,  the rule of
inheritance must be regarded not as an isolated factor in
the distribution of wealth,  but as one factor among others
working together for the  same end. While the daughter,
according to Muhammadan Law, is held to be full owner of
the property given to her  by both the father and the
husband at the time of her marriage;  while, further, she
absolutely owns her dower-money which may be prompt or
deferred according to her own choice, and in lieu of which
she can hold possession of the whole of her husband’s
property till payment,  the responsibility of maintaining  her
throughout her life is wholly thrown  on the husband. If you
judge the working of the rule of inheritance  from this point
of view, you will ﬁnd that  there is no material diﬀerence
between the economic position of sons and daughters, and
it is really by this apparent inequality  of their legal shares
that the law secures the equality demanded by  the Turkish
poet. The truth is that the  principles underlying the Quranic
law of inheritance - this supremely original branch of
Muhammadan Law as von Kremer describes it - have not yet
received from Muslim lawyers the attention they  deserve.44
Modern society with its bitter  class-struggles ought to set us
thinking; and if we study our laws in reference to  the
impending revolution in modern economic life,  we are likely
to discover, in the foundational principles,  hitherto
unrevealed aspects which we can work out with a renewed
faith in the wisdom of these principles.

247
(b) The Àadâth. The second great source of Muhammadan
Law is the traditions of the Holy Prophet. These have been
the subject of great discussion both in ancient and modern
times. Among their modern critics Professor Goldziher has
subjected them to a searching examination in the  light of
modern canons of historical criticism, and arrives at the
conclusion that they are, on the whole, untrustworthy.45
Another European writer, after examining the Muslim
methods of determining the genuineness of a tradition,  and
pointing out the theoretical  possibilities of error, arrives at
the following conclusion:

‘It must be said in conclusion that the  preceding
considerations represent only theoretical possibilities and
that the question whether  and how far these possibilities
have become actualities is largely a matter  of how far the
actual circumstances oﬀered inducements for making use of
the possibilities. Doubtless, the latter, relatively  speaking,
were few and aﬀected only a small proportion of the  entire
Sunnah. It may therefore be said that . . . for the most  part
the collections of Sunnah considered by the Moslems as
canonical are genuine records of the rise and early growth
of Islam’ (Mohammedan Theories of Finance).46 For our
present purposes, however, we must distinguish traditions
of a purely legal import from those which  are of a non-legal
character. With regard to the former, there arises a very
important question as to how far they  embody the pre-
Islamic usages of Arabia which were in some cases left
intact, and in others modiﬁed by  the Prophet. It is diﬃcult to
make this discovery, for our early writers do not  always
refer to pre-Islamic usages. Nor is it possible to discover that
usages, left intact by express or tacit approval of the
Prophet, were intended to be universal in their application.
Sh«h WalâAll«h has a very illuminating discussion on the
point. I reproduce here the substance of his view. The
prophetic method of teaching, according to Sh«h WalâAll«h,

248
is that, generally speaking, the law revealed by a prophet
takes especial notice of the habits, ways, and peculiarities of
the people to whom he is speciﬁcally sent. The prophet who
aims at all-embracing principles, however, can neither
reveal diﬀerent principles for diﬀerent  peoples, nor leaves
them to work out their  own rules of conduct. His method is
to train one particular people, and to  use them as a nucleus
for the building up of a universal Sharâ‘ah. In doing so he
accentuates the principles underlying the social life  of all
mankind, and applies them to concrete cases in the light of
the speciﬁc habits of the people immediately  before him.
The Sharâ‘ah values (AÁk«m) resulting from this application
(e.g. rules relating to penalties for crimes) are in  a sense
speciﬁc to that people; and since their observance is not an
end in itself they cannot be strictly  enforced in the case of
future generations.47 It was perhaps in view of this that Abë
Àanâfah, who had, a keen insight into the universal
character of Islam, made practically no use of these
traditions. The fact that he introduced  the principle of
IstiÁs«n, i.e. juristic preference, which necessitates a careful
study of actual conditions in legal thinking,  throws further
light on the motives which determined  his attitude  towards
this source of Muhammadan Law. It is said that Abë Àanâfah
made no use of traditions because there were no regular
collections in his day. In the ﬁrst place, it is not true  to say
that there were no collections in his day, as the collections
of ‘Abd al-M«lik and Zuhrâ were made not less than thirty
years before the death of Abë Àanâfah. But even if we
suppose that these collections never reached him, or that
they did not contain traditions  of a legal import, Abë
Àanâfah, like M«lik and AÁmad Ibn Àanbal after him, could
have easily made his own collection if he had deemed such
a thing necessary. On the whole, then, the attitude of Abë
Àanâfah towards the traditions of a purely legal import  is to
my mind perfectly sound; and if modern  Liberalism

249
considers it safer not to make any indiscriminate  use of
them as a source of law, it will be only following  one of the
greatest exponents of Muhammadan Law in Sunni Islam. It
is, however, impossible to deny the fact that  the
traditionists, by insisting  on the value of the concrete case
as against the tendency to abstract  thinking in law, have
done the greatest service to the Law of Islam. And a further
intelligent study  of the literature  of traditions, if used as
indicative of the spirit  in which the Prophet himself
interpreted his Revelation, may still be of  great help in
understanding the life-value of the  legal principles
enunciated in the Qur’«n. A complete grasp of their  life-
value alone can equip us in our endeavour to reinterpret  the
foundational principles.

(c) The Ijm«`’. The third source of Muhammadan Law is
Ijm«’ which is, in my opinion, perhaps the most  important
legal notion in Islam. It is, however, strange that  this
important notion,  while invoking great academic discussions
in early Islam, remained practically a mere idea, and rarely
assumed the form of a permanent institution  in any
Muhammadan country. Possibly its transformation into a
permanent legislative institution  was contrary to the
political interests of the  kind of absolute monarchy that
grew up in Islam immediately after  the fourth Caliph. It was,
I think, favourable to the  interest of the Umayyad and the
Abbasid Caliphs to leave the power of Ijtih«d to individual
Mujtahids rather than encourage the formation  of a
permanent assembly which might become too powerful  for
them. It is, however, extremely  satisfactory to note that  the
pressure of new world-forces and the political experience of
European nations are impressing on the mind of modern
Islam the value and possibilities of the idea of Ijm«’.  The
growth of republican spirit and the  gradual formation of
legislative assemblies in Muslim lands constitute a great
step in advance. The transfer of the power of Ijtih«d  from

250
individual representatives of schools to a Muslim legislative
assembly which, in view of the growth of opposing sects, is
the only possible form Ijm«’ can take in modern times,  will
secure contributions to legal discussion from laymen who
happen to possess a keen insight into aﬀairs. In this way
alone can we stir into activity  the dormant spirit  of life in our
legal system, and give it an evolutionary  outlook. In India,
however, diﬃculties are likely to  arise for it is doubtful
whether a non-Muslim legislative assembly can exercise the
power of Ijtih«d.

But there are one or two questions which must be raised
and answered in regard to the Ijm«’. Can the Ijm«’ repeal
the Qur’«n? It is unnecessary to raise this question before a
Muslim audience, but I consider it necessary to do so in view
of a very misleading statement by a  European critic in a
book called Mohammedan Theories of Finance - published
by the Columbia University. The author of this book says,
without citing any authority,  that  according to some Hanafâ
and Mu‘tazilah writers the Ijm«’ can repeal the  Qur’«n.48
There is not the slightest justiﬁcation  for such a statement
in the legal literature  of Islam. Not even a tradition of the
Prophet can have any such eﬀect. It seems to me that the
author is misled by the word Naskh in the writings of  our
early doctors to whom, as Im«m Sh«Çibâë points out in al-
Muwaﬃq«t, vol. iii, p. 65, this word, when used in
discussions relating to the Ijm«’ of the companions, meant
only the power to extend or limit  the application of a
Quranic rule of law, and not the power to repeal or
supersede it by another rule of law. And even in the exercise
of this power the legal theory, as ‘Amâdâ- a Sh«ﬁ‘â doctor
of law who died about the middle of the  seventh century,
and whose work is recently published in Egypt - tells us, is
that the companions must have been in possession of a
Sharâ‘ah value (Àukm) entitling them to  such a limitation or
extension.49

251
But supposing the companions have unanimously decided a
certain point, the further  question is whether later
generations are bound by their decision. Shauk«nâ has fully
discussed this point, and cited the views held by writers
belonging to diﬀerent  schools.50 I think it is necessary in this
connexion to discriminate between a decision relating  to a
question of fact and the one relating  to a question of law. In
the former case, as for instance, when the question arose
whether the two small Sërahs known as Mu‘awwidhat«n 51
formed part of the Qur’«n or  not, and the companions
unanimously decided that they did,  we are bound by their
decision, obviously because the companions alone were in a
position to know the fact.  In the latter case the question is
one of interpretation  only, and I venture to think, on the
authority of Karkhâ, that  later generations are not bound by
the decision of the companions. Says Karkhâ: ‘The Sunnah
of the companions is binding in matters which  cannot be
cleared up by Qiy«s, but it is not so in matters which  can be
established by Qiy«s.’52

One more question may be asked as to the legislative
activity of a modern Muslim assembly which must  consist,
at least for the present, mostly  of men possessing no
knowledge of the subtleties of Muhammadan Law. Such an
assembly may make grave mistakes in their interpretation
of law. How can we exclude or at least reduce the
possibilities of erroneous interpretation? The Persian
constitution of 1906 provided  a separate ecclesiastical
committee of ‘Ulem« - ‘conversant  with the aﬀairs of the
world’ - having power to supervise the  legislative activity  of
the Mejlis. This, in my opinion, dangerous arrangement is
probably necessary in view of the Persian constitutional
theory. According to that theory, I believe, the  king is a mere
custodian of the realm which really belongs to the  Absent
Im«m. The ‘Ulem«, as representatives of the Im«m, consider

252
themselves entitled to supervise the whole life  of the
community, though I fail to  understand how, in the absence
of an apostolic succession, they establish their claim to
represent the Im«m. But whatever may be the Persian
constitutional theory, the  arrangement is not free from
danger, and may be tried, if at all,  only as a temporary
measure in Sunnâ countries.53 The ‘Ulem« should form a
vital part of a Muslim legislative assembly helping  and
guiding free discussion on questions relating to law. The
only eﬀective remedy for the  possibilities of erroneous
interpretations is to reform  the present system of legal
education in Muhammadan countries, to extend its sphere,
and to combine it with an intelligent  study of modern
jurisprudence.54

(d) The Qiy«s. The fourth basis of Fiqh is Qiy«s, i.e. the use
of analogical reasoning in legislation. In view of diﬀerent
social and agricultural conditions prevailing in the  countries
conquered by Islam, the school of Abë Àanâfah seem to
have found, on the whole, little or no  guidance from the
precedents recorded in the literature of traditions.  The only
alternative open to them  was to resort to speculative reason
in their interpretations.  The application of Aristotelian logic,
however, though suggested by the discovery of new
conditions in Iraq, was likely to prove exceedingly harmful in
the preliminary stages of legal development.  The intricate
behaviour of life cannot be subjected to hard and fast rules
logically deducible from certain general notions. Yet, looked
at through the spectacles of Aristotle’s logic, it  appears to
be a mechanism pure and simple with no internal principle
of movement. Thus, the school of Abë Àanâfah tended to
ignore the creative freedom and arbitrariness of life,  and
hoped to build a logically perfect legal system  on the lines
of pure reason. The legists of Àij«z, however, true to the
practical genius of their race, raised strong protests against
the scholastic subtleties of the legalists of Iraq, and their

253
tendency to imagine unreal cases which they rightly  thought
would turn the Law of Islam into a kind of lifeless
mechanism. These bitter controversies among the early
doctors of Islam led to a critical deﬁnition  of the limitations,
conditions, and correctives of Qiy«s which, though originally
appeared as a mere disguise for Mujtahid’s personal
opinion, eventually became a source of life and movement
in the Law of Islam. The spirit of the acute criticism of M«lik
and Sh«ﬁ‘â on Abë Àanâfah’s principle of Qiy«s, as a source
of law, constitutes really an eﬀective  Semitic restraint on
the Aryan tendency to seize the abstract in preference to
the concrete, to enjoy the idea rather  than the event. This
was really a controversy between the advocates of
deductive and inductive methods in legal research. The
legists of Iraq originally emphasized the eternal aspect of
the ‘notion’, while those of  Àij«z laid stress on its temporal
aspect. The latter, however, did not see the full signiﬁcance
of their own position, and their instinctive  partiality  to the
legal tradition of Àij«z narrowed their vision to  the
‘precedents’ that had actually  happened in the days of the
Prophet and his companions. No doubt they recognized the
value of the concrete, but at the  same time they eternalized
it, rarely resorting to Qiy«s based on the study of the
concrete as such. Their criticism of Abë Àanâfah and his
school, however, emancipated the concrete as it were, and
brought out the necessity of observing the actual  movement
and variety of life in the  interpretation of  juristic principles.
Thus the school of Abë Àanâfah which fully assimilated the
results of this controversy is absolutely free in its  essential
principle and possesses much greater power of creative
adaptation than any other school of Muhammadan Law. But,
contrary to the spirit  of his own school, the modern Hanafâ
legist has eternalized the interpretations  of the founder or
his immediate followers much in the same way as the early
critics of Abë Àanâfah eternalized the decisions given on
concrete cases. Properly understood and applied, the

254
essential principle of this school, i.e. Qiy«s, as Sh«ﬁ‘â rightly
says, is only another name for Ijtih«d 55 which, within the
limits of the revealed texts,  is absolutely free; and its
importance as a principle can be seen from the fact that,
according to most of the doctors, as Q«dâ Shauk«nâ tells us,
it was permitted even in the  lifetime of the  Holy Prophet.56
The closing of the door of Ijtih«d is pure ﬁction suggested
partly by the crystallization  of legal thought in Islam, and
partly by that  intellectual laziness which, especially in the
period of spiritual decay, turns great thinkers  into idols. If
some of the later doctors have upheld this ﬁction,  modern
Islam is not bound by this voluntary surrender of intellectual
independence. Zarkashâ writing in the eighth century  of the
Hijrah rightly observes:

‘If the upholders of this ﬁction  mean that the previous
writers had more facilities, while the  later writers had more
diﬃculties, in their  way, it is, nonsense; for it does not
require much understanding to see that Ijtih«d  for later
doctors is easier than for the earlier doctors. Indeed the
commentaries on the Kor«n and sunnah have been
compiled and multiplied to such an extent  that the mujtahid
of today has more material for interpretation  than he
needs’. 57

This brief discussion, I hope, will make it clear to you that
neither in the foundational  principles nor in the structure  of
our systems, as we ﬁnd them today, is there anything  to
justify the present attitude.  Equipped with penetrative
thought and fresh experience the world of Islam should
courageously proceed to the work of reconstruction before
them. This work of reconstruction, however, has a far more
serious aspect than mere adjustment to modern conditions
of life. The Great European War bringing in its wake the
awakening on Turkey - the element of stability in the world
of Islam - as a French writer has recently described her, and

255
the new economic experiment tried in  the neighbourhood of
Muslim Asia, must open our eyes to the inner meaning and
destiny of Islam.58 Humanity needs three things today - a
spiritual interpretation  of the universe, spiritual
emancipation of the individual, and basic principles of  a
universal import directing  the evolution of human society on
a spiritual basis. Modern Europe has, no doubt, built
idealistic systems on these lines, but experience shows that
truth revealed through pure reason is incapable of bringing
that ﬁre of living  conviction which personal revelation alone
can bring. This is the reason why pure thought has so little
inﬂuenced men, while religion has always elevated
individuals, and transformed whole societies. The idealism
of Europe never became a living factor in her life, and the
result is a perverted ego seeking itself through mutually
intolerant democracies whose sole function is to exploit the
poor in the interest of the rich.  Believe me, Europe today is
the greatest hindrance in the way of man’s  ethical
advancement. The Muslim, on the other hand, is in
possession of these ultimate ideas of the basis of a
revelation, which, speaking from the inmost depths  of life,
internalizes its own apparent externality. With him the
spiritual basis of life is a matter of  conviction for which even
the least enlightened man among us can easily lay down his
life; and in view of the basic idea of Islam that  there can be
no further revelation binding  on man, we ought to be
spiritually one of the most emancipated  peoples on earth.
Early Muslims emerging out of the spiritual slavery of pre-
Islamic Asia were not in a position to realize the true
signiﬁcance of this basic idea. Let the Muslim of today
appreciate his position, reconstruct his social life in the light
of ultimate principles, and evolve, out  of the hitherto
partially revealed purpose of Islam, that spiritual  democracy
which is the ultimate aim of  Islam.59

256
Lecture  VI  Notes:  THE PRINCIPLE OF MOVEMENT IN
THE STRUCTURE OF ISLAM
 1. The Qur’«n maintains the divine origin of man by
aﬃrming that  God breathed of His own spirit unto him as in
verses 15:29; 32:9; and 38:72.

2. Constantine the Great was Roman Emperor from 306 to
337. He was converted to Christianity, it is said, by seeing a
luminous cross in the sky. By his celebrated Edict of
Toleration in 313 he raised Christianity to equality with  the
public pagan cults in the Empire. For his attempt at  the
uniﬁcation of Christianity,  cf. Will Durant, Caesar and Christ,
pp. 655-61, and The Cambridge Medieval History, vol.1,
chapter i.

3. Flavius Claudius Julianus (331-363), nephew of
Constantine, traditionally known as Julian the Apostate,
ruled the Roman Empire from 361 to 363. Studying in
Athens in 355, he frequented pagan Neoplatonist circles. As
emperor, he at once proclaimed himself a pagan, restored
freedom of worship for pagans and began a campaign
against the orthodox church. Cf. Alice Gardner, Julian and
the Last Struggle of Paganism against Christianity, and Will
Durant, The Age of Faith, pp. 10-19.

4. See J. H. Denison, Emotion as the Basis of Civilization, pp.
267-68.

5. The principle of Divine Unity as embodied in the Quranic
proclamation: l«il«ha illa-All«h: there is no God except All«h.
It is a constant theme of the Qur’«n and is repeatedly
mentioned as the basic principle not only of  Islam but of
every religion revealed by God.

6. Reference is to the Quranic verse 29:69. During the
course of his conversation with one of his admirers, Allama

257
Iqbal is reported to have made the following  general
observation with reference to this  verse: ‘All eﬀorts in the
pursuit of sciences and for attainment  of perfections and
high goals in life which in one way or other are beneﬁcial  to
humanity are man’s exerting  in the way of Allah (Malfëz«t-i
Iqb«l, ed. and annotated Dr Abë’lLaith Siddâqâ, p. 67).

Translating this verse thus: ‘But as for those who strive hard
in Our cause - We shall most certainly guide them onto
paths that lead unto us’, Muhammad Asad adds in a
footnote that  the plural ‘used here is obviously meant to
stress the fact - alluded to often in  the Qur’«n - that there
are many paths which lead to a cognizance (ma‘rifah) of
God’ (The Message of the Qur’«n, p. 616, note 61).

7. Cf. Abë D«wëd, Aqdâya: 11; Tirmidhâ, AÁk«m: 3, and
D«rimâ, Kit«b al-Sunan, I, 60; this hadâth is generally
regarded as the very basis of Ijtih«d in Islam. On the view
expressed by certain scholars that this hadâth is to be
ranked as al-mursal, cf. ‘Abd al-Q«dir, Nazarah, ÿ mmah ﬁ
T«rikh al-Fiqh al-Isl«mâ, I, 70 and 210, and Sayyid
Muhammad Yësuf Binorâas quoted by Dr Kh«lid Mas‘ëd,
‘Khutub«t-i Iqb«l men Ijtih«d ki Ta‘râf: Ijtih«d k« T«râkhâ Pas-
i Manzar’, Fikr-o-Nazar, XV/vii-viii (Islamabad, Jan-Feb. 1978),
50-51. See also Ahmad Hasan (tr.), Sunan Abë D«wëd, III,
109, note 3034 based on Shams al-Haqq, ‘Aun al-Ma’bëd li-
hall-i Mushkil«t Sunan Abë D«wëd, III, 331.

8. These three degrees of legislation in the language of the
later jurists of Islam are: ijtih«d  ﬁ’l-shar’, ijtih«d  ﬁ’lmadhhab
and ijtih«d ﬁ’l-mas«’il;  cf. Subhâ Mahmas«nâ, Falsafat al-
Tashrâ’ ﬁ’l-Islam, English trans. F. J. Ziadeh, p. 94, and N. P.
Aghnides, Mohammeden Theories of Finance, pp. 121-22.
For somewhat diﬀerent schemes of gradation of the jurists
(for example the one laid down by the Ottomon  scholar and
Shaikh al-Isla`m Kem«l P«shaza`deh (d. 940/1534) in his

258
(Tabaq«t al-Fuqah«’) and minor diﬀerences in nomenclature
in diﬀerent schools of law (Hanaﬁs, Sh«fâ‘â’s and others), cf.
Z«hid al-Kautharâ, Husn al-Taq«dâfâ Sârat al-Im«m abâYësuf
al-Q«îâ, pp. 24-25.

It is the possibilities anew of the ﬁrst  degree of Ijtih«d -
complete authority  in legislation - that Allama Iqbal
proposes to consider in what he calls (and this is to be
noted) ‘this paper’  rather than ‘this  lecture’ as everywhere
else in the present work. This is a manifest reference to a
‘paper on Ijtih«d’ that  he read on 13 December 1924 at the
annual session of Anjuman-i Him«yat-i Isl«m. Cf. M. Khalid
Mas‘ëd, ‘Iqbal’s Lecture on Ijtih«d’, Iqbal Review, XIX/iii
(October 1978), p. 8, quoting in English the announcement
about this Lecture published in the Daily Zamând«r Lahore,
12 December 1924; and also S. M. Ikram, Modern Muslim
India and the Birth of Pakistan, p. 183, note 19 where the
worthy author tells  us that he ‘was present at this meeting
as a young student’.

Among Allama Iqbal’s letters discovered only recently are
the four of them addressed to Professor M. Muhammad
Shaﬁ’ of University Oriental College, Lahore (later Chairman:
Urdu Encyclopaedia of Islam). These letters dating from 13
March 1924 to 1 May 1924, reproduced with their facsimiles
in Dr Rana M. N. Ehsan Elahie, ‘Iqbal on the Freedom of
Ijtiha`d’, Oriental  College Magazine (Allama Iqbal Centenary
Number), LIII (1977), 295-300, throw light, among other
things, on the authors and movements that  Allama Iqbal
thought it  was necessary for him to study anew for the
writing of what he calls in one of these letters  a paper on
the ‘freedom of Ijtih«d  in Modern Islam’. A few months later
when the courts were closed for summer vacation Allama
Iqbal in his letter dated 13  August 1924 to M. Sa‘âd al-Dân
Ja’farâ informed him that he was writing an elaborate  paper
on ‘The Idea of Ijtih«d, in the Law of Islam’ (cf. Aur«q-i

259
Gumgashtah, ed. Rahâm Bakhsh Shaheen, p. 118). This is
the paper which when ﬁnally written  was read in the above-
mentioned session of the Anjuman-i Àim«yat-i Isl«m in
December 1924; the present Lecture, it is now generally
believed, is a revised and enlarged form of this very paper.

9. Cf. M. Hanâf Nadvâ, ‘Mas’alah Khalq-i Qur’«n’ in ‘Aqliy«t-i
Ibn Taimâyyah (Urdu), pp. 231-53, and A. J. Arberry,
Revelation and Reason in Islam, pp. 23-27.

References to this hotly debated issue of the eternity  or
createdness of the Qur’«n are also to be found in Allama
Iqbal’s private notes, for example those on the  back cover
of his own copy of Spengler’s Decline of the West (cf.
Descriptive Catalogue of Allama Iqbal’s Personal Library,
Plate No. 33) or his highly valuable one-page private study
notes preserved in Allama Iqbal Museum, Lahore (cf. Relics
of Allama Iqbal: Catalogue, I, 26). It is, however, in one of
his greatest poems ‘Iblâs ki Majlis-i Shër« (‘Satan’s
Parliament’) included in the posthumous Armugh«n-i Hij«z
that one is to ﬁnd his ﬁnal  verdict on this baseless scholastic
controversy:

Are the words of the Qur’«n created or uncreated?
 In which belief does lie the salvation of the ummah?
 Are the idols of L«t and Man«t chiselled by Muslim theology
 Not suﬃceint for the Muslims of today?
 10. Cf. Ibn Qutaibah, Ta’wâ l Mukhtalif al-Àadâth, p.19.

11. Cf. Development of Metaphysics in Persia, p. 54, where it
is stated that rationalism  ‘tended to disintegrate  the
solidarity of the Islamic Church’; also W. M. Watt, ‘The
Political Attitudes of the Mu‘tazilah’, Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society (1962), pp. 38-54.

260
12. Cf. Muhammad al-Khudari, T«râkh al-Tashrâ’ al-Isl«mâ,
Urdu trans. ‘Abd al-Sal«m Nadvâ, p. 323; Ibn Qutaibah,
Ma‘«rif, p. 217, and J. Schacht, The Origins of Muhammadan
Jurisprudence, p. 242. According to A. J. Arberry, Sufy«n al-
Thaurâ’s school of jurisprudence survive for about two
centuries; cf. Muslim Saints and Mystics, p. 129 translator’s
prefatory remarks.

13. On the distinction of z«hir and b«tin,  see Allama Iqbal’s
article ‘Ilm-i Za`hir  wa ‘Ilm-i Ba`tin  (Anw«r-i Iqb«l, ed. B. A.
Dar, pp. 268-77) and also the following passage from Allama
Iqbal’s article captioned as ‘Self in the Light  of Relativity’
(Thoughts and Reﬂections of Iqbal, ed. S. A. Vahid, pp. 113-
14): ‘The mystic method has attracted  some of the best
minds in the history of mankind.  Probably there is
something in it. But I am inclined  to think that  it is
detrimental to  some of the equally important  interests of
life, and is prompted by a desire to escape from the arduous
task of the conquest of matter  through intellect.  The surest
way to realise the potentialities  of the world is to associate
with its shifting  actualities. I believe that Empirical Science -
association with the visible - is an indispensable stage in the
life of contemplation. In the  words of the Qur’«n, the
Universe that confronts us is not ba`til.  It has its uses, and
the most important  use of it is that the  eﬀort to overcome
the obstruction oﬀered by  it sharpens our insight and
prepared us for an insertion into what lies below the  surface
of phenomena.

14. The founder of Z«hirâ school of law was D«wëd b. ‘Alâb.
Khalaf (c. 200-270/c. 815-884) who ﬂourished in Baghdad;
Ibn Haïm (384-456/994-1064) was its founder in Muslim
Spain and its most illustrious representative in  Islam.
According to Goldziher, Ibn Hazm was the ﬁrst to apply the
principles of the Z«hirite school to  dogmatics (The Z«hiris:
Their Doctrine and Their History, p. 112); cf. also Goldziher’s

261
articles: ‘D«wëd B. ‘Alâ B. Khalf’ and ‘Ibn Hazm’ in
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, V, 406 b and VII, 71 a.

15. Cf. Serajul Haque, ‘Ibn Taimiyya’s Conception of Analogy
and Consensus’, Islamic Culture, XVII (1943), 
77-78; Ahmad Hasan, The Doctrine of Ijm«‘ in Islam, pp.
189-92, and H. Laoust, ‘Ibn Taymiyya’, Encyclopaedia of
Islam (New edition), III, 954.

16. Cf. D.’B. Macdonald, Development of Muslim Theology,
p. 275.

17. Suyëtâ, Husn al-Mëh«darah 1, 183; also ‘Abd Muta’«l al-
Sa’idâ, Al-Mujaddidën ﬁ’l-Isl«m, pp. 8-12. Cf. also Allama
Iqbal’s ‘Rejoinder to The Light’ (Speeches, Writings and
Statements of Iqbal, pp. 167-68) wherein, commenting  on
the tradition  that mujaddids appear at the head of every
century (Abë Dawëd, Mal«him: 1), he observed that the
tradition ‘was probably  popularised by Jal«lud-Dân Suyëti in
his own interest and much importance cannot be attached
to it.’

Reference may also be made here to Allama’s letter dated 7
April 1932 addressed to Muhammad Ahsan wherein, among
other things, he observes that, according to  his ﬁrm belief
(‘aqâdh), all traditions  relating to mujaddidiyat  are the
product of Persian and non-Arab imagination and they
certainly are foreign to the  true spirit of the  Qur’«n (cf.
Iqb«ln«mah, II, 231).

18. For Allama Iqbal’s statements issued from time to time
in clariﬁcation on meanings and intentions  of panIslamic
movement or pan-Islamism see: Letters and Writings of
Iqbal, pp. 55-57; Speeches, Writings and Statements of
Iqbal, p. 237; Guft«r-i Iqb«l, ed. M. Rafâq Afîal, pp. 177-79
and 226 - the earliest of these statements  is contained in

262
Allama’s letter dated 22 August 1910 to  Editor: Paisa Akhb«r
reproduced in Riaz Hussain, ‘1910 men Duny«-i Isl«m kü
H«l«t’ (Political Conditions of the Islamic World in 1910),
Iqbal Review, XIX/ii (July 1978), 88-90.

In three of these statements Allama Iqbal has approvingly
referred to Professor E. G. Browne’s well-grounded views on
‘Pan-Islamism’, the earliest of which were published (s.v.) in
Lectures on the History of the Nineteenth Century, ed. F.
Kirpatrick (Cambridge, 1904).

It may be added that Allama’s article  ‘Political Thought in
Islam’, Sociological Review, I (1908), 249-61 (reproduced in
Speeches, Writings and Statements, pp. 107-21), was
originally a lecture delivered by  him in a meeting of the Pan-
Islamic Society, London, founded by Abdullah Suhrawardy in
1903 - the Society also had its own journal: Pan-Islam.
Incidentally, there is a mention  of Allama’s six lectures on
Islamic subjects in London by his biographers (cf. Abdullah
Anwar Beg, The Poet of the East, p. 28, and Dr Abdus Sal«m
Khurshâd, Sargudhasht-i Iqb«l, pp. 60-61) which is
supported by Allama’s letter dated  10 February 1908 to
Khwa`jah Hasan Niz«mâ, listing the ‘topics’ of four of these
lectures as (i) ‘Islamic Mysticism’, (ii) ‘Inﬂuence  of Muslim
Thought on European Civilization’, (iii) ‘Muslim Democracy’,
and (iv) ‘Islam and Reason’ (cf. Iqb«ln«mah, II, 358).
Abdullah Anwar Beg, however, speaks of Allama’s
extempore lecture on ‘Certain Aspects of Islam’ under the
auspices of the Pan-Islamic Society, which, it is said, was
reported verbatim in  a number of leading newspapers the
next day (ibid.).

19. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Wahh«b’s date of birth is now
more generally given as 1115/1703; cf., however, Khair al-
Dân al-Zikriklâ, Al-A’l«m, VII, 138 (note) and A History of

263
Muslim Philosophy, ed. M. M. Sharif, II, 
1446, in support of placing it  in 1111/1700.

It is signiﬁcant to note  that whenever Allama Iqbal thought
of modernist movements in Islam, he traced them  back to
the movement of Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Wahh«b cf. Letters
and Writings of Iqbal, pp. 82 and 93. In his valuable article
‘Islam and Ahmadism’ Allama Iqbal observes: ‘Syed Ahmad
Khan in India, Syed Jamal-ud-Din Afghani in Afghanistan and
Mufti Alam Jan in Russia. These men were probably inspired
by Muhammad Ibn Abdul Wahab who was born in Nejd in
1700, the founder of the so-called Wahabi movement which
may ﬁtly be described as the ﬁrst  throb of life in modern
Islam’ (Speeches, Writings and Statements, p. 190). Again,
in his letter dated  7 April 1932 to Muhammad Ahsan, Allama
Iqbal, explaining the pre-eminent position  of Jam«l alDân
Afgh«nâ in modern Islam, wrote: ‘The future historian of the
Muslims of Egypt, Iran, Turkey and India will ﬁrst of all
mention the name of ‘Abd al-Wahh«b Najadi and then of
Jam«l al-Dân Afgh«nâ’ (cf. Iqb«ln«mah, II, 231).

20. Cf. article ‘Ibn Tëmart’ in Encyclopaedia of Islam (New
edition), III, 958-60, also in Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam
and R. Le Tourneau, The Almohad Movement in North Africa
in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries, chapter 4.

21. This is a clear reference to the well-known saying of the
Prophet: innamal-a’m«lu bi’nniyy«ti,  i.e. ‘Actions shall be
judged only by intentions’.  It is to be noted that  this Áadâth
of great moral and spiritual  import has been quoted by
Bukh«râ in seven places and it is with this that he opens his
Al-J«mâ al-SaÁiÁ.
22. For this Áadâth worded: ‘al-arÁu kulluh«masjid-an’, see
Tirmidhâ, Sal«t: 119; Nas«â, Ghusl: 26; Mas«jid: 3 and 42;
Ibn M«jah, Tah«rah: 90, and D«rimâ, Siyar: 28 and Sal«t:
111. This superb saying of the Prophet also found

264
expression in Allama’s verse, viz. Kulliy«t-i Iqb«l (F«risâ),
Rumëz-i Bekhudâ, p. 114, v. 3, and Pas Chih B«yad Kard, p.
817, v. 8:

Through the bounty of the ruler of  our faith, the entire  earth
became our mosque. 
The King of the Faith said to the Muslims: The whole earth is
my mosque’ (trans. B. A. Dar).

23. Cf. The Muqaddimah, trans. F. Rosenthal, I, 388-92.

24. For the Khawa`rij’s view of the Caliphate, see Allama
Iqbal’s article ‘Political Thought in Islam’ ( Speeches,
Writings and Statements of Iqbal, pp. 119-20); also W.
Thomson, ‘Kharijitism and the Kharijites’, Macdonald
Presentation Volume, pp. 371-89, and E. Tyan, Institutions
du droit public musulman, ii,  546-61.

25. Cf. F. A. Tansel (ed), Ziya Gö kalp kü lliyati ‘i: Sü rler ve
halk masallar, p. 129. On Allama’s translation of the
passages from Ziya G’kalp’s kulliyati, Dr Annemarie
Schimmel observes: ‘Iqbal did not know Turkish, has studied
his (Ziya Gö kalp’s) work through the German translation of
August Fischer, and it is of interest to see how he (Iqbal)
sometimes changes or omits some words of the translation
when reproducing the verses in the Lecture’ (Gabriel’s Wing,
p. 242).

It may be added that these changes of omissions are
perhaps more due to August Fischer’s German translation as
given in his Aus der religiö sen Reformbewegung in der Tü
rkei (Religious Reform Movement in Turkey) than to Allama.
The term ‘esri’, for example, has been used by Ziya Gö kalp
for ‘secular’ and not for  ‘modern’ as Fischer has put it.
Again, a line from the original Turkish text is missing in the
present passage, but this is so in the German translation.

265
For this comparative study of the German and English
translations of passages from Gö kalp’s kü lliyati, I am very
much indebted to Professor S. Qudratullah Fatimi, formerly
Director: Regional Cooperation for Development, Islamabad.

26. This is a reference to the Quranic verse 49:13.

27. Cf. Ziya Gö kalp kü lliyati, p. 112. According to the
Turkish original, the second sentence in this passage should
more ﬁttingly  have begun with ‘in this period’  rather than
with ‘in every period’  as rendered by A. Fischer. Again the
next, i.e. the third  sentence, may be said to be not so very
close to the text; yet  it is quite faithful  to its German
version.

28. Cf. ibid., p. 113; also Uriel Heyd, Foundation of Turkish
Nationalism: The Life and Teachings of Ziya Gö kalp, pp.
102-03, and Allama Iqbal’s statement ‘On the Introduction
of Turkish Prayers by Ghazi Mustafa Kemal Pasha’ published
in the Weekly Light (Lahore), 16 February 1932, reproduced
in Rahim Bakhsh Shaheen (ed.), Memontos of Iqbal, pp. 59-
60.

29. On Ibn Tumart’s innovation of introducing the call to
prayer in the Berber language, cf. Ibn Abâ Zar’, Raud al-
Qirt«s, Fr. trans. A. Beaumier, Histoire des souverains du
Magreb, p. 250; I. Goldziher, ‘Materalien zur Kenntniss der
Almohadenbewegung in Nordafrika’, ZDMG, XLI (1887), 71,
and D. B. Macdonald, Development of Muslim Theology, p.
249. This practice, according to Ahmad b. Kh«lid al-Sal«wâ,
was stopped and call to prayer in Arabic restored by oﬃcial
orders in 621/1224; cf. his Al-Istiqs«li Akhb«r Duwal al-
Maghrib’l-Aqs«, II, 212.

30. Cf. Ziya Gö kalp kü lliyati, p. 133. The word ‘sun’ in the
second sentence of this passage stands for Gunum in

266
Turkish which, we are told, could as well be translated as
‘day’; some allowance, however, is to be made for
translation of poetical symbols from  one language into
another.

31. Cf. ibid., p. 161. It is interesting to note  how very close is
late Professor H. A. R. Gibb’s translation of this passage as
well as of the one preceding it (Modern Trends in Islam, pp.
91-92), to that of Allama’s even though  his ﬁrst reference is
to the French version of them in F. Ziyaeddin Fahri’s Ziya Gö
kalp: sa vie et sa sociologie, p. 240.

32. Cf. Bukh«râ, I’tis«m: 26; ‘Ilm: 39; Jan«’iz: 32; Marad«:
17, and Muslim, Jan«’iz: 23 and Wasâyyah: 22; see also last
in Sahih Muslim, English translation by A. H. Siddiqi`, III 870,
note 2077.

33. For further elucidation of Allama’s observations on
Luther and his movement here as also in a passage in his
‘Statement on Islam and Nationalism in Reply to a
Statement of Maulana Husain Ahmad’ (Speeches, Writings
and Statements of Iqbal, p. 254), see his most famous and
historical ‘All-India Muslim League Presidential Address of 29
December 1930’, ibid., pp. 4-5. Cf. also the closing passages
of the article: ‘Reformation’  in An Encyclopedia of Religion,
ed. Vergilius Ferm, p. 642.

34. Cf. Subhâ Mahmas«nâ, Falsafah-i Sharâ‘at-i Isl«m, Urdu
trans. M. Ahmad Ridvâ, pp. 70-83.

35. This acute observation about the development of legal
reasoning in Islam from the deductive to the  inductive
attitude in  interpretation is further  elaborated by Allama
Iqbal on pp. 140-41. It may be worthwhile to  critically
examine in the light of  this observation the attempts  made
by some of the well-known Western writers on Islamic law to

267
analytically trace the  historical development of legal theory
and practice in early Islam, viz. N. J. Coulson, A History of
Islamic Law, chapters 3-5; J. Schacht, Introduction to Islamic
Law, chapters 7-9 and his earlier pioneer work: Origins of
Muhammadan Jurisprudence, by General Index especially
under ‘Medinese and ‘Iraqians’.

36. This is a reference to a passage in Lecture I, p. 7.
 37. Cf. M. V. Merchant, A Book of Quranic Laws, chapters v-
vii.
 38. Cf. Briefe ü ber Religion, pp. 72 and 81. The passages
translated here are as under:
 "Das Urchristentum legte keinen Wert auf die Erhaltung von
Staat Recht, Organisation, Produktion. Es denkt einfach
nicht ü ber die Bedingungen der Existenz der menschlichen
Gesellschaft nach."
 Also entweder man wagt es, staatslos sein zu wollen, man
wirft sich der Anarchie freiwillig in  die arme, oder man
entschliesst sich, neben seinem religiö sen Bekenntnis ein
politisches Bekenntnis zu haben.

Joseph Friedrich Naumann (1860-1919), a passage from
whose very widely read Briefe ü ber Religion (‘Letters on
Religion’) has been quoted above in Lecture III, pp. 64-65,
was a German Protestant theologian, socialist politician,
political journalist and a champion of Mitteleuropa  plan. He
was one of the founders and the ﬁrst president of  German
National Socialist Party (1896) which both in its name and in
its policy of according great importance  to the agricultural
and working classes in the development of the State
adumbrated Hitler’s Nazi Party (1920). His Mitteleuropa
published in 1915 (English translation by C. M. Meredith in
1916) stirred up considerable discussion during World War I
as it revived, under the impulse of Pan-Germanism, the idea
of a Central European Confederation including Turkey and
the Balkan States under Germany’s cultural and economic

268
control. It also contemplated the  expansion of the Berlin-
Baghdad railway into a grandiose scheme of empire
extending from Antwerp in Belgium to  the Persian Gulf.

Except for the year 1912-13, Naumann was the member of
Reichstag (German Parliament) from 1907 to 1919. Shortly
before his death, he was elected as the leader of
Democratic Party. Naumann known for his wide learning,
acumen and personal integrity was very inﬂuential  with
German liberal intellectuals of his day. For the life and works
of Naumann, cf. the two articles: ‘Naumann, Friedrich’ and
‘National Socialism, German’ by Theodor Heuss in the
Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences, XI, 310 and 225a; also
The New Encyclopaedia Britannica (Micropaedia), VIII, 561.
For some information given in the above note I am deeply
indebted to the Dutch scholar the  Reverend Dr Jan Slomp
and his younger colleague Mr Harry Mintjes. Mr Mintjes took
all the trouble to ﬁnd  out what he said was the oldest
available edition of Briefe ü ber Religion (Berlin, Georg
Reimer, 1916, sixth edition) by making a search for it  in all
the libraries of Amsterdam. Dr Jan Slamp was kind enough
to mark the passages in Briefe quoted by Allama Iqbal in
English and mail these to me for the beneﬁt  of all Iqbalian
scholars.
39. Hence, The Introduction of Dissolution of Muslim
Marriages Act or Indian Act VIII of 1939. Cf. Maul«n« Ashraf
‘Alâ Th«nawâ, Al-Hilat al-N«jizah lil-Halâlat al-’ÿjizah, p. 99
and A. A. A. Fyzee, Outlines of Muhammadan Law, pp. 153-
61.

40. See Al-Muw«ﬁq«t, II, 4: also Ghaz«lâ, Al-Mustasf«, 1,
140.
 41. Cf. al-Marghin«nâ, Al-Hid«yah, II, Kit«b al-Nik«h, p. 328;
English trans. The Hedaya or Guide by C. Hamilton, p. 66.

269
42. Cf. Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal, p. 194,
where, while making an appraisal of Ataturk’s ‘supposed or
real innovations’, Allama Iqbal observes: ‘The adoption of
the Swiss code with its rule of inheritance is certainly  a
serious error . . . . The joy of emancipation from the fetters
of a long-standing priestcraft sometimes  derives a people to
untried courses of action. But Turkey as well as the rest of
the world of Islam has yet to realize the hitherto  unrevealed
economic aspects of the Islamic law of inheritance which
von Kremer describes as the supremely original branch of
Muslim law.’ For some recent accounts of the ‘economic
signiﬁcance of the Quranic rule of inheritance’,  cf. M. A.
Mannan, Islamic Economics, pp. 176-86 and Shaikh Mahmud
Ahmad, Economics of Islam, pp. 154-58.

43. Marriage has been named in the Qur’«n as mâth«q-an
ghalâz-an, i.e. a strong covenant (4:21).
 44. Cf. M. V. Merchant, op. cit., pp. 179-86.

45. Cf. I. Goldziher, Muhammedanische Studien, English
trans. C. R. Barber and S. M. Stern, Muslim Studies, II, 
18f. This is the view held also by some other orientalists
such as D. S. Margoliouth, The Early Development of
Mohammedanism, pp. 79-89, and H. Lammens, Islam:
Beliefs and Institutions, pp. 65-81.

46. This is the closing paragraph of chapter III of
Mohammedan Theories of Finance: With an Introduction to
Mohammedan Law and a Bibliography by Nicolas P.
Aghnides published by Columbia University (New York) in
1916 as one of its Studies in History, Economics and Public
Law. A copy of this work as reported by Dr M. ‘Abdulla`h
Chaghata`’i was sent to Allama Iqbal by Chaudhry Rahmat
‘Ali`Kha`n (President: American Muslim Association) from
the United States and was presented to him on the
conclusion of the thirty-eighth  annual session of Anjuman-i

270
Àim«yat-i Isl«m (Lahore), i.e. on 31 March 1923 or soon
after. Dr Chaghat«‘âs essay: ‘Khutuba`t-i Madra`s ka Pas-i
Manzar’ in his Iqb«l kâ Âuhbat Men and the section: ‘Six
Lectures on the Reconstruction of Religious Thought in
Islam’ with useful notes in Dr. Rafâ al-Dân H«shimâ’s
TaÄ«nâf-i Iqb«l k« TaÁqâqâ-o Tauîâhâ MuÇ«la’ah throw light
on the immediate impact  that Aghnides’s book had on
Allama’s mind. It seems that Aghnides’s book did interest
Allama and did play some part in urging him to  seek and
study some of the outstanding works on Usël al-Fiqh such as
those by ÿmidâ, Sh«Çibâ, Sh«h Walâ All«h, Shauk«nâ, and
others. This is evident from a number of Allama’s letters  to
Sayyid Sulaim«n Nadvâas also from his letters from 13
March 1924 to 1 May 1924 to Professor Maulavâ M. Shafâ’
[Oriental College Magazine, LIII (1977), 295-300]. It is to be
noted that besides a pointed reference to a highly
provocative view of Ijm«’ alluded  to by Aghnides, three
passages from part I of Mohammedan Theories of Finance
are included in the last section of the  present Lecture, which
in this way may be said to be next only  to the poems of Ziya
Gö kalp exquisitely translated from Fischer’s German
version of them.

47. This is remarkable though admittedly a summarized
English version of the following quite signiﬁcant  passage
from Sh«h Walâ All«h’s magnum opus Hujjat All«h al-
B«lighah (I,118):

This is the passage quoted also in Shiblâ Nëm«nâ’s Al-Kal«m
(pp. 114-15), a pointed reference to which is made in Allama
Iqbal’s letter dated 22  September 1929 addressed to Sayyid
Sulaim«n Nadvâ. There are in fact three more letters to
Sayyid Sulaim«n Nadvâ in September 1929, which all show
Allama’s keen interest in and preceptive study of  Hujjat
All«h al-B«lighah at the time of his ﬁnal drafting  of the
present Lecture (cf. Iqb«ln«mah, pp. 160-63).

271
From the study of these letters it appears that  Allama Iqbal
in his interpretation  of at least the above passage from
Àujjat All«h al-B«ligah was much closer to Shiblâ Nëm«nâ
than to Sayyid Sulaimân Nadvâ.

It is to be noted that  Allama Iqbal was always keen to seek
and study the works of Sha`h WalâAll«h, whom he
considered to be ‘the ﬁrst Muslim who felt  the urge of a new
spirit in him’  (Lecture IV, p. 78). Some of these works have
been referred to by titles in  Allama’s more than 1200 letters
and it is noteworthy that  their number  exceeds that of the
works of any other great Muslim thinker;  Ghazz«lâ, Fakhr al-
Dân R«zâ, Jal«l al-Dân Rumâ, Ibn Taimiyyah, Ibn Qayyim;
Sadr al-Dân Shâr«zâ, or any other. In his letter dated 23
September 1936 to Maulavi Ahmad Rid« Bijnàrâ, Allama
reports that he had not received his copies of Sh«h
WalâAll«h’s Al-Khair al-Kathâr and Tafhâm«t supposed to
have been dispatched to him through some dealer in
Lahore. He also expresses in this letter his keen desire to
have the services on suitable terms of some competent
Muslim scholar, well-versed in Islamic jurisprudence and
very well-read in the works of Sh«h Walâ All«h.

48. Cf. Aghnides, op. cit., p. 91. This is the statement which,
according to Dr ‘Abdullah Chaghat«‘â (op. cit., pp. 
300-04) and Dr. Rafâ al-Dân H«shimâ occasioned Allama
Iqbal’s ﬁqhi discussions with a number of renowned religious
scholars which ﬁnally led to his writing  a paper on Ijtih«d in
1924; the present Lecture may be said to be only a
developed form of that paper. On the impossible question of
Ijm«’s repealing the Qur’«n one is to note Allama’s two
inquiring letters  to Sayyid Sulaim«n Nadvâ and more
importantly  a letter also to Maul«n« Abul Kal«m Az«d
(Iqb«ln«mah, 1, 131-35).

49. ÿmidâ, Ihk«m ﬁ Usël al-Ahk«m, 1, 373.

272
 50. Shauk«nâ, Irsh«d al-Fuhël, pp. 65-72.
 51. Mu’awwidhat«n are the last two sërahs of the Qur’«n,
i.e. 113 and 114; they are called so because they teach man
how to seek refuge with God and betake himself to His
protection.
 52. This is summing up of Karkhi`’s somewhat longer
statement as quoted by Aghnides, op. cit., p. 106; cf. also
Sarakhsâ, Usul «l-Sarakhsâ, II, 105.
 53. For Allama’s views on Persian constitutional theory see
his articles: ‘Political Thought in Islam’ and ‘Islam and
Ahmadism’, Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal, pp.
118-19 and 195.

54. For Allama’s practical guidelines to reform the present
system of legal education in the modern Muslim world
especially in the subcontinent, see his very valuable letter
dated 4 June 1925 to Sahibzadah Aftab Ahmad Khan (Letters
of Iqbal, p. 155); also the last paragraph of his Presidential
Address at the All-India Muslim Conference on 21 March
1932 (Speeches, Writings and Statements, p. 43).

55. For Sh«fâ’â’s ‘identiﬁcation’ of Qiy«s and Ijtih«d, cf. M.
Khadduri, Islamic Jurisprudence Sh«ﬁ’âs Ris«lah, p. 288 and
J. Schacht, The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, pp.
127-28.
 56. Cf. Shauk«nâ, op. cit., p. 199; ÿmidâ, op. cit., IV, 42ﬀ;
and Mahmas«nâ, op. cit., Urdu trans. M. A. Ridvâ, p. 188.

57. Cf. Mohammedan Theories of Finance, p. 125. This is the
observation, in fact, of the Sh«ﬁ’âjurist  Badr alDân
Muhammad b. Bah«dur b. ‘Abd All«h al-Zarkashâ of eighth
century and not of Sarkashâof tenth century  of the Hijrah,
as it got printed in  the previous editions of the present work
(including the one by Oxford University Press in 1934).
‘Sarkashâ’ is a palpable misprint for Zarkashâ’; Aghnides in
the above-cited work spells it ‘Zarkashi’  but places him in

273
the tenth century  of the Hijrah. None of the Zarkashâs,
however, given in the wellknown biographical dictionaries,
say, ‘Umar Rid« Kahhalah’s ﬁfteen-volume Mu‘jam al-
Mu‘allifân (V, 181; IX, 121; X, 22, 205, 239 and XI, 273) is
reported to have belonged to tenth  century - except, of
course, Muhammad b. Ibra`hi`m b. Lu’lu’ al-Zarkashâ
mentioned in VIII, 214 who is said to be still living after
882/1477 or as alZiriklâ puts it  to have died sometime after
932/1526 (op. cit., V, 302); but this  Zarkashâ, though he
may be said to have made name as an historian of the
Muwahhids and the Hafasids, was no jurist.

It is to be noted that  the passage on the future prospects of
Ijtih«d quoted by Allama Iqbal is only a more signiﬁcant  part
of Zarkashâ’s somewhat longer statement which Aghnides
gives as under:

If they [i.e., the  people entertaining this belief]  are thinking
of their contemporaries, it  is a fact that they  have had
contemporaries like al-Qaﬀ«l, al-Ghazz«lâ, al-Razâ, al-R«ﬁ’â,
and others, all of whom have been full mujtahids,  and if
they mean by it that  their contemporaries are not  endowed
and blessed by God with the same perfection, intellectual
ability and power, or understanding,  it is absurd and a sign
of crass ignorance; ﬁnally, if they mean  that the previous
writers had more facilities, while  the later writers has more
diﬃculties, in their  way; it is again nonsense, for it does not
require much understanding to see that Ijtih«d  for the later
doctors (muta’akhirën) is easier than for  the earlier doctors.
Indeed the commentaries on the Koran and the sunnah have
been compiled and multiplied to  such an extent that the
mujtahid of today has more material  for interpretation  than
he needs.’

This statement on ijtih«d which Aghnides ascribes clearly to
Zarkashâ, albeit of the tenth  century of Hijrah, is in fact, as

274
may be seen, translation of the following  passage from
Shauk«nâ’s Irsh«d al-Fuhël (p. 223):

From the study of the section of Irsh«d al-Fuhël dealing with
the ‘possibility of there  being a period of time without  a
mujtahid, it  becomes abundantly clear that the views
embodied in the above passage are those of the Sh«ﬁ’â
jurist Badr al-Dân Zarkashâ of the eighth century of Hijrah
and not of Sarkashâ, nor of Zarkashâof the tenth century.
For an account of the life and works of Badr al-Dân
Zarkashâ, cf. Muhammad Abë’l-Fadl alRahâm’s ‘introduction’
to Zarkashâ’s well-known, Al-Burh«n ﬁ ‘ulëm al-Qur’«n.

It may be added that the  Persian translator of the present
work Mr. Ahmad ÿr«m considers ‘Sarkashâ’ to be a misprint
for ‘Sarakhsâ’, i.e. the Hanafâ jurist Shams al-ÿimmah Abë
Bakr Muhammad b. Abâ Sahl al-Sarakhsâ, the author of the
well-known thirty-volume al-Mabsët, who died in near about
483/1090. Referring to ‘many errors and ﬂaws’ that  have
unfortunately crept  into the Lahore edition of the present
work, Mr. ÿr«m is inclined to think that  ‘tenth century’  is
another misprint for  ‘ﬁfth century’  (cf. Ihy«-i Fikr-i Dânâ dar
Isl«m, pp. 202-03, note).

Ahmad ÿr«m admittedly takes his clue from  a line in
Madame Eva Meyerovitch’s French translation: Reconstruire
la pensee religieus de l’Islam (p.192) and perhaps also from
the Urdu translation: Tashkâl-i Jadâd Il«hiy«t-i Isl«mâyah (p.
274) by the late Syed Nadhir Niy«zâ who corrects the name
(Sarakhsâ) but not the date. This is, however, better than
the Arabic translator who retains both  the misprints without
any comments (cf. ‘Abb«s Mahmëd, Tajdâd al-Tafkâr al-
Dânâﬁ’l-Isl«m, p. 206).

58. Cf. article ‘Turkey’ in Encyclopaedia Britannica, (1953)
XXII, 606-08. The French writer alluded to by Allama Iqbal is

275
Andre Servier whose work L’Islam et la psychologie da
Musulman translated under the intriguing title Islam and the
Psychology of a Musulman by A. S. Moss Blandell (London,
1924) aroused the curiosity of many. It is in the last chapter
of his work dealing with French foreign policy that Servier
makes some observations on Turkey such as the following:

(a) ‘The Turks constitute an element of balance . . . they
form a buﬀer State between Europe and the Asiatic ferment’
(p. 267). (Italics mine.)
 (b) ‘Our interests, therefore, make it our duty to protect
them, to maintain them as an element of equilibrium in the
Musulman World’ (p. 268). (Italics mine.)

59. This may proﬁtably be compared with the following
passage from Allama’s famous ‘Statement on Islam and
Nationalism in Reply to a Statement of Maulana Husain
Ahmad’: ‘The history of man is an inﬁnite process of mutual
conﬂicts, sanguine battles and civil wars. In these
circumstances can we have among mankind a constitution,
the social life of which is based upon peace and security?
The Quran’s answer is: Yes, provided man takes for his ideal
the propagation of the Unity of God in the thoughts and
actions of mankind. The search for such an ideal and its
maintenance is no miracle of political manoeuvring: it is a
peculiar greatness of the Holy Prophet that the self-invented
distinctions and superiority complexes of the nations of the
world are destroyed and there comes into being a
community which can be styled ummat-am muslimat-al laka
(a community submissive to Thee, 2:128) and to whose
thoughts and actions the divine dictate shuhada’a ‘al-an
nas-i (a community that bears witness to the truth before all
mankind, 2:143) justly applies’ (Speeches, Writings and
Statements of Iqbal, pp. 262-63).

276
Is Religion   Possible?
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal

Broadly speaking religious life may be divided into three
periods. These may be described as the periods of ‘Faith’,
‘Thought’, and ‘Discovery.’ In the ﬁrst  period religious life
appears as a form of discipline which the individual or a
whole people must accept as an unconditional command
without any rational  understanding of the ultimate  meaning
and purpose of that command. This attitude  may be of great
consequence in the social and political history of a people,
but is not of much consequence in so far as the individual’s
inner growth and expansion are concerned. Perfect
submission to discipline is followed by a rational
understanding of the discipline and the  ultimate source of
its authority. In this period religious life  seeks its foundation
in a kind of metaphysics - a logically consistent view of the
world with God as a part of that view. In the third  period
metaphysics is displaced by psychology, and religious life
develops the ambition to come into  direct contact with  the
Ultimate Reality. It is here that religion becomes a matter  of
personal assimilation of life and power; and the individual
achieves a free personality, not by releasing himself from
the fetters of the  law, but by discovering the ultimate  source
of the law within the  depths of his own consciousness. As in
the words of a Muslim Suﬁ - ‘no understanding of the Holy
Book is possible until it is actually revealed to the  believer
just as it was revealed to the Prophet.’1 It is, then, in the
sense of this last phase in the development of religious life
that I use the word religion in the  question that I now
propose to raise. Religion in this sense is known by the
unfortunate name of Mysticism, which is supposed to be a
life-denying, fact-avoiding attitude  of mind directly  opposed
to the radically empirical  outlook of our times. Yet higher
religion, which is only a search for a larger life, is essentially
experience and recognized the necessity of experience as

277
its foundation long before science learnt to do so. It is a
genuine eﬀort to clarify  human consciousness, and is, as
such, as critical of its level of experience as Naturalism is of
its own level.

As we all know, it was Kant who ﬁrst raised the question: ‘Is
metaphysics possible?’2 He answered this question in the
negative; and his argument applies with equal force to  the
realities in which religion is especially interested. The
manifold of sense, according to him, must fulﬁl  certain
formal conditions in order to constitute  knowledge. The
thing-in-itself is only a limiting  idea. Its function is merely
regulative. If there is some actuality  corresponding to the
idea, it falls outside the boundaries of experience, and
consequently its existence cannot be rationally
demonstrated. This verdict of Kant cannot be easily
accepted. It may fairly be argued that  in view of the more
recent developments of science, such as the nature of
matter as ‘bottled-up  light waves’, the idea of the  universe
as an act of thought, ﬁniteness of space and time and
Heisenberg’s principle of indeterminacy3 in Nature, the case
for a system of rational theology is not  so bad as Kant was
led to think. But for our present  purposes it is unnecessary
to consider this point in detail. As to the  thing-in-itself,
which is inaccessible to pure reason because of its falling
beyond the boundaries of experience, Kant’s verdict can be
accepted only if we start with  the assumption that all
experience other than the normal level of  experience is
impossible. The only question, therefore, is whether the
normal level is the only level of knowledge-yielding
experience. Kant’s view of the thing-in-itself and the  thing
as it appears to us very much determined the character  of
his question regarding the possibility of metaphysics. But
what if the position, as understood by him, is reversed? The
great Muslim Suﬁ philosopher, Muhyaddin Ibn al-‘Arabâ of
Spain, has made the acute observation that God is a

278
percept; the world is a concept.4 Another Muslim Suﬁ
thinker and poet, ‘Ir«qâ, insists on the plurality  of space-
orders and time-orders and speaks of a Divine Time and a
Divine Space.5 It may be that what we call the external
world is only an intellectual construction,  and that there are
other levels of human experience capable of being
systematized by other orders of space and time - levels in
which concept and analysis do not play the same role as
they do in the case of our normal experience. It may,
however, be said that the level of experience to  which
concepts are inapplicable cannot yield any knowledge of a
universal character, for concepts alone are capable of being
socialized. The standpoint of the man who relies on religious
experience for capturing Reality must always remain
individual and incommunicable. This objection has some
force if it is meant to insinuate  that the mystic  is wholly
ruled by his traditional ways, attitudes,  and expectations.
Conservatism is as bad in religion as in any other
department of human activity.  It destroys the ego’s creative
freedom and closes up the paths of fresh spiritual
enterprise. This is the main reason why our medieval mystic
techniques can no longer produce original discoveries of
ancient Truth. The fact, however, that religious experience is
incommunicable does not mean that the religious man’s
pursuit is futile. Indeed, the incommunicability  of religious
experience gives us a clue to the ultimate nature  of the ego.
In our daily social intercourse we live and move in seclusion,
as it were. We do not care to reach the inmost individuality
of men. We treat them as mere functions, and approach
them from those aspects of their identity  which are capable
of conceptual treatment. The climax of religious life,
however, is the discovery of the ego as an individual deeper
than his conceptually describable habitual selfhood. It is in
contact with the Most Real that the ego discovers its
uniqueness, its metaphysical status, and the possibility of

279
improvement in that  status. Strictly speaking, the
experience which leads to this discovery is not a
conceptually manageable intellectual fact;  it is a vital fact,
an attitude consequent on an inner biological transformation
which cannot be captured in the net of logical categories.  It
can embody itself only in a world-making or world-shaking
act; and in this form alone the content  of this timeless
experience can diﬀuse itself in the time-movement,  and
make itself eﬀectively visible  to the eye of history. It seems
that the method of dealing  with Reality by means of
concepts is not at all a serious way of dealing with it.
Science does not care whether its electron is a real entity or
not. It may be a mere symbol, a mere convention. Religion,
which is essentially a mode of actual living, is the only
serious way of handing Reality. As a form of higher
experience it is corrective of our concepts of philosophical
theology or at least makes us suspicious of the purely
rational process which forms these concepts. Science can
aﬀord to ignore metaphysics altogether,  and may even
believe it to be ‘a justiﬁed  form of poetry’6, as Lange
deﬁned it, or ‘a legitimate  play of grown-ups’, as Nietzsche
described it. But the religious expert who seeks to discover
his personal status in the constitution of things  cannot, in
view of the ﬁnal aim of his struggle,  be satisﬁed with what
science may regard as a vital lie, a mere ‘as-if’7 to regulate
thought and conduct. In so far as the ultimate  nature of
Reality is concerned, nothing is at stake in the venture of
science; in the religious venture the whole career of the ego
as an assimilative personal centre of life and experience is
at stake. Conduct, which involves a decision of the ultimate
fate of the agent cannot be based on illusions. A wrong
concept misleads the understanding; a wrong deed
degrades the whole man, and may eventually demolish the
structure of the human ego. The mere concept aﬀects life
only partially; the deed is dynamically  related to Reality and

280
issues from a generally constant attitude of the  whole man
towards reality. No doubt the deed, i.e. the control of
psychological and physiological processes with a view to
tune up the ego for an immediate  contact with the Ultimate
Reality is, and cannot but be, individual in form and content;
yet the deed, too, is liable to be socialized when others
begin to live though it  with a view to discover for
themselves its eﬀectiveness as a method of approaching
the Real. The evidence of religious experts in all ages and
countries is that there are potential  types of consciousness
lying close to our normal consciousness. If these types of
consciousness open up possibilities of life-giving and
knowledge-yielding experience, the question of the
possibility of religion as a form of higher experience is a
perfectly legitimate  one and demands our serious attention.

But, apart from the legitimacy  of the question, there are
important reasons why it should be raised at the present
moment of the history of modern  culture. In the ﬁrst place,
the scientiﬁc interest of the  question. It seems that every
culture has a form of Naturalism peculiar to its  own world-
feeling; and it further  appears that every form of Naturalism
ends in some sort of Atomism. We have Indian Atomism,
Greek Atomism, Muslim Atomism, and Modern Atomism.8
Modern Atomism is, however, unique. Its amazing
mathematics which sees the universe as an elaborate
diﬀerential equation; and its  physics which, following its own
methods, has been led to smash some of the old gods of its
own temple, have already brought us to the point  of asking
the question whether the casualty-bound aspect of Nature is
the whole truth about it? Is not the  Ultimate Reality invading
our consciousness from some other direction as well? Is the
purely intellectual method  of overcoming Nature the only
method? ‘We have acknowledged’, says Professor
Eddington,

281
‘that the entities  of physics can from their very nature  form
only a partial aspect of the reality. How are we to deal with
the other part? It cannot be said that  other part concerns us
less than the physical entities. Feelings, purpose, values,
made up our consciousness as much as senseimpressions.
We follow up the sense-impressions and ﬁnd that they lead
into an external world discussed by science; we follow up
the other elements of our being and ﬁnd that  they lead - not
into a world of space and time, but surely somewhere.’9

In the second place we have to look to the great practical
importance of the question. The modern man with his
philosophies of criticism and scientiﬁc specialism ﬁnds
himself in a strange predicament. His Naturalism has given
him an unprecedented control over the forces of Nature, but
has robbed him of faith in his own future. It  is strange how
the same idea aﬀects diﬀerent cultures  diﬀerently. The
formulation of the theory  of evolution in the world  of Islam
brought into being Rëmâ’s tremendous enthusiasm for the
biological future of man. No cultured Muslim can read such
passages as the following without a thrill of joy:

Low in the earth 
I lived in realms of ore and stone; 
And then I smiled in many-tinted ﬂowers; Then roving with
the wild and wandering hours, O’er earth and air and
ocean’s zone, 
In a new birth, 
I dived and ﬂew, 
And crept and ran, 
And all the secret of my essence drew 
Within a form that brought  them all to view - And lo, a Man! 
And then my goal, 
Beyond the clouds, beyond the sky, 
In realms where none may change or die - In angel form;
and then away 

282
Beyond the bounds of night and day, 
And Life and Death, unseen or seen, 
Where all that is hath ever been, 
As One and Whole.

(Rëmâ: Thadani’s Translation)10

On the other hand, the formulation of  the same view of
evolution with far greater  precision in Europe has led to the
belief that ‘there  now appears to be no scientiﬁc basis for
the idea that the present rich  complexity of human
endowment will ever be materially  exceeded.’ That is how
the modern man’s secret despair hides itself behind the
screen of scientiﬁc terminology. Nietzsche, although he
thought that the  idea of evolution did not justify  the belief
that man was unsurpassable, cannot be regarded as an
exception in this respect. His enthusiasm for the future  of
man ended in the doctrine of eternal recurrence - perhaps
the most hopeless idea of immortality  ever formed by man.
This eternal repetition is not eternal ‘becoming’;  it is the
same old idea of ‘being’ masquerading as ‘becoming.’

Thus, wholly overshadowed by the results of his intellectual
activity, the modern  man has ceased to live soulfully, i.e.
from within. In the domain of thought  he is living in open
conﬂict with himself; and in  the domain of economic and
political life he is living in open conﬂict  with others. He ﬁnds
himself unable to control his ruthless egoism and his inﬁnite
goldhunger which is gradually killing all higher  striving in
him and bringing him nothing but  lifeweariness. Absorbed in
the ‘fact’, that  is to say, the optically present  source of
sensation, he is entirely cut oﬀ from the  unplumbed depths
of his own being. In the wake of his systematic materialism
has at last come that paralysis of energy which Huxley
apprehended and deplored. The condition of things in the
East is no better. The technique of medieval mysticism by

283
which religious life, in its higher manifestations,  developed
itself both in the East and in the West has now practically
failed. And in the Muslim East it has, perhaps, done far
greater havoc than anywhere else. Far from reintegrating
the forces of the average man’s inner life, and thus
preparing him for participation  in the march of history, it  has
taught him a false renunciation and made him  perfectly
contented with his ignorance and spiritual  thraldom. No
wonder then that the modern  Muslim in Turkey, Egypt, and
Persia is led to seek fresh sources of energy in the creation
of new loyalties, such as patriotism and nationalism which
Nietzsche described as ‘sickness and unreason’, and ‘the
strongest force against culture11’. Disappointed of a purely
religious method of spiritual renewal which alone brings us
into touch with the everlasting  fountain of life and power by
expanding our thought and emotion, the  modern Muslim
fondly hopes to unlock fresh sources of energy by narrowing
down his thought and emotion. Modern atheistic socialism,
which possesses all the fervour of a new religion, has a
broader outlook; but having received its philosophical basis
from the Hegelians of the left wing, it  rises in revolt against
the very source which could have given it strength  and
purpose. Both nationalism and atheistic socialism, at least in
the present state of human adjustments, must  draw upon
the psychological forces of hate, suspicion, and resentment
which tend to impoverish the soul of man and close up his
hidden sources of spiritual energy. Neither the technique of
medieval mysticism, nor nationalism, nor atheistic  socialism
can cure the ills of a despairing humanity. Surely the present
moment is one of great crisis in the history  of modern
culture. The modern world stands in need of biological
renewal. And religion, which in its higher manifestations is
neither dogma, nor priesthood, nor ritual,  can alone
ethically prepare the modern man for the  burden of the
great responsibility which the advancement of  modern

284
science necessarily involves, and restore to him that
attitude of faith  which makes him capable of winning a
personality here and retaining it in  hereafter. It is only by
rising to a fresh vision of his origin and future, his whence
and whither, that man will  eventually triumph  over a society
motivated by an inhuman competition,  and a civilization
which has lost its spiritual unity by  its inner conﬂict of
religious and political values.

As I have indicated before,12 religion as a deliberate
enterprise to seize the ultimate  principle of value and
thereby to reintegrate  the forces of one’s own personality, is
a fact which cannot be denied. The whole religious literature
of the world, including the records of specialists’ personal
experiences, though perhaps expressed in the thought-
forms of an out-of-date psychology, is a standing testimony
to it. These experiences are perfectly natural, like our
normal experiences. The evidence is that they possess a
cognitive value for the recipient,  and, what is much more
important, a capacity to  centralize the forces of the ego and
thereby to endow him with a new personality. The view that
such experiences are neurotic or mystical will not ﬁnally
settle the question of their  meaning or value. If an outlook
beyond physics is possible, we must courageously face the
possibility, even though it may disturb  or tend to modify  our
normal ways of life and thought. The interests of truth
require that we must abandon our present attitude.  It does
not matter in the  least if the religious attitude  is originally
determined by some kind of physiological disorder. George
Fox may be a neurotic; but who can deny his purifying
power in England’s religious life of his day? Muhammad, we
are told, was a psychopath13. Well, if a psychopath has the
power to give a fresh direction to the  course of human
history, it is a point of the  highest psychological interest to
search his original experience which has turned slaves into
leaders of men, and has inspired the conduct and shaped

285
the career of whole races of mankind. Judging from the
various types of activity that  emanated from the  movement
initiated by the Prophet of Islam, his spiritual tension  and
the kind of behaviour which issued from it, cannot  be
regarded as a response to a mere fantasy inside his brain. It
is impossible to understand it except as a response to an
objective situation generative  of new enthusiasms, new
organizations, new starting-points. If we look at the  matter
from the standpoint of anthropology  it appears that a
psychopath is an important factor in  the economy of
humanity’s social organization. His way is not to classify
facts and discover causes: he thinks in terms of life and
movement with a view to create  new patterns of behaviour
for mankind. No doubt he has his pitfalls and illusions just as
the scientist who relies on sense-experience has his pitfalls
and illusions. A careful study of his method, however, shows
that he is not less alert than the  scientist in the matter  of
eliminating the alloy of  illusion from his experience.

The question for us outsiders is to ﬁnd out an eﬀective
method of inquiry into the  nature and signiﬁcance of this
extraordinary experience. The Arab historian Ibn Khaldën,
who laid the foundations of modern scientiﬁc history,  was
the ﬁrst to seriously approach this side of human
psychology and reached what we now call the idea of the
subliminal self. Later, Sir William Hamilton in England and
Leibniz in Germany interested themselves in some of the
more unknown phenomena of the mind. Jung, however, is
probably right in thinking  that the essential nature  of
religion is beyond the province of analytic psychology. In his
discussion of the relation of analytic psychology to poetic
art, he tells us that the  process of artistic form alone can be
the object of psychology. The essential nature of art,
according to him, cannot be the object of a psychological
method of approach. ‘A distinction’, says Jung,

286
‘must also be made in the realm of religion;  there also a
psychological consideration is permissible only in respect of
the emotional and symbolical phenomena of a religion,
where the essential nature of religion is in no way involved,
as indeed it cannot be. For were this possible, not religion
alone, but art also could be treated as a mere sub-division
of psychology.’14

Yet Jung has violated his own principle more than once in his
writings. The result of this procedure is that, instead of
giving us a real insight into the essential nature  of religion
and its meaning for human personality, our modern
psychology has given us quite a plethora of new theories
which proceed on a complete misunderstanding of the
nature of religion as revealed in its higher manifestations,
and carry us in an entirely hopeless direction. The
implication of these theories, on the whole, is that  religion
does not relate the human ego to any objective reality
beyond himself; it is merely a kind of well-meaning
biological device calculated to build barriers of an ethical
nature round human society in order to protect  the social
fabric against the otherwise unrestrainable instincts  of the
ego. That is why, according to this newer psychology,
Christianity has already fulﬁlled its biological  mission, and it
is impossible for the modern man to understand its original
signiﬁcance. Jung concludes:

‘Most certainly we should still understand it,  had our
customs even a breath of ancient brutality,  for we can
hardly realize in this day the whirlwinds of the  unchained
libido which roared through the ancient Rome of the
Caesars. The civilized man of the present day seems very
far removed from that. He has become merely neurotic. So
for us the necessities which brought forth Christianity  have
actually been lost, since we no longer understand their
meaning. We do not know against what it had to protect  us.

287
For enlightened people, the socalled religiousness has
already approached very close to a neurosis. In the past two
thousand years Christianity has done its work and has
erected barriers of repression, which protect us from the
sight of our own sinfulness.’15

This is missing the whole point of higher religious life.
Sexual self-restraint is only a preliminary stage in the ego’s
evolution. The ultimate purpose of religious life  is to make
this evolution move in a direction  far more important to  the
destiny of the ego than the moral  health of the social fabric
which forms his present environment. The basic perception
from which religious life moves forward is the present
slender unity of the ego, his liability  to dissolution, his
amenability to reformation  and the capacity for an ampler
freedom to create new situations in known and unknown
environments. In view of this fundamental  perception higher
religious life ﬁxes its gaze on experiences symbolic of those
subtle movements of Reality which seriously aﬀect the
destiny of the ego as a possibly permanent element in the
constitution of Reality. If we look at the matter  from this
point of view modern psychology has not yet touched even
the outer fringe of religious life,  and is still far from the
richness and variety of what is called religious experience.
In order to give you an idea of its richness and variety I
quote here the substance of a passage from a great
religious genius of the seventeenth century - Shaikh AÁmad
of Sirhind - whose fearless analytical criticism of
contemporary Suﬁsm resulted in the development of  a new
technique. All the various system of Suﬁ technique in India
came from Central Asia and Arabia; his is the only technique
which crossed the Indian border and is still a living force in
the Punjab, Afghanistan, and Asiatic Russia. I am afraid it is
not possible for me to expound the real meaning of this
passage in the language of modern psychology; for such
language does not yet exist. Since, however, my object is

288
simply to give you an idea of the inﬁnite  wealth of
experience which the ego in his Divine quest has to sift and
pass through, I do hope you will excuse me for the
apparently outlandish terminology  which possesses a real
substance of meaning, but which was formed under the
inspiration of a religious psychology developed in the
atmosphere of a diﬀerent culture. Coming now to the
passage. The experience of one ‘Abd al-Mumin was
described to the Shaikh as follows:

‘Heavens and Earth and God’s Throne and Hell and Paradise
have all ceased to exist for me. When I look round I ﬁnd
them nowhere. When I stand in the presence of somebody I
see nobody before me: nay even my own being is lost to
me. God is inﬁnite. Nobody can encompass Him; and this is
the extreme limit  of spiritual experience. No saint has been
able to go beyond this’.

On this the Shaikh replied:

‘The experience which is described has its origin in the ever
varying life of the Qalb; and it appears to  me that the
recipient of its has not yet passed even one-fourth of the
innumerable ‘Stations’ of the Qalb. The remaining three-
fourths must be passed through in order to ﬁnish the
experiences of this ﬁrst ‘Station’ of  spiritual life. Beyond this
‘Station’ there are other ‘Stations’  know as RëÁ, Sirr-i-Khafâ,
and Sirr-i-Akhf«, each of these ‘Stations’ which together
constitute what is technically  called ‘ÿlam-i Amr has its own
characteristic states and experiences. After having passed
through these ‘Stations’ the seeker of truth  gradually
receives the illuminations of ‘Divine Names’ and ‘Divine
Attributes’ and ﬁnally  the illuminations of the  ‘Divine
Essence’.’16

289
Whatever may be the psychological ground of the
distinctions made in this passage it gives us at least some
idea of a whole universe of inner experience as seen by a
great reformer of Islamic Sufâsm. According to him this
‘ÿlam-i Amr, i.e. ‘the world  of directive energy’, must  be
passed through before one reaches that unique experience
which symbolizes the purely objective. This is the reason
why I say that modern psychology has not yet touched even
the outer fringe of the  subject. Personally, I do not at all feel
hopeful of the present state of things  in either biology or
psychology. Mere analytical criticism with some
understanding of the organic conditions of the imagery  in
which religious life has sometimes manifested itself is not
likely to carry us to the living  roots of human personality.
Assuming that sex-imagery has played a role in the history
of religion, or that religion has furnished imaginative  means
of escape from, or adjustment to, an unpleasant reality  -
these ways of looking at the matter  cannot, in the least,
aﬀect the ultimate  aim of religious life, that  is to say, the
reconstruction of the ﬁnite  ego by bringing him into contact
with an eternal life-process, and thus giving him a
metaphysical status of which we can have only a partial
understanding in the half-choking atmosphere of our
present environment. If, therefore, the  science of
psychology is ever likely to possess a real signiﬁcance for
the life of mankind, it  must develop an independent method
calculated to discover a new technique better suited  to the
temper of our times. Perhaps a psychopath endowed with a
great intellect - the combination  is not an impossibility -
may give us a clue to such a technique. In modern Europe,
Nietzsche, whose life and activity form, at least to  us
Easterns, an exceedingly interesting problem in religious
psychology, was endowed with some sort of a constitutional
equipment for such an undertaking. His mental history  is
not without a parallel in the  history of Eastern Sufâsm. That
a really ‘imperative’  vision of the Divine in man did come to

290
him, cannot be denied. I call his vision ‘imperative’  because
it appears to have given him a kind of prophetic  mentality
which, by some kind of technique, aims at turning  its visions
into permanent life-forces. Yet Nietzsche was a failure; and
his failure was mainly due to his intellectual  progenitors
such as Schopenhauer, Darwin, and Lange whose inﬂuence
completely blinded him to the  real signiﬁcance of his vision.
Instead of looking for a spiritual rule which would develop
the Divine even in a plebeian and thus open up before him
an inﬁnite future, Nietzsche was driven to seek the
realization of his vision in such scheme as aristocratic
radicalism.17 As I have said of him elsewhere:

The ‘I am’ which he seeketh, 
Lieth beyond philosophy, beyond knowledge. 
The plant that groweth only from  the invisible soil of the
heart of man, Groweth not from a mere heap of clay!18

Thus failed a genius whose vision was solely determined by
his internal forces, and remained unproductive for want of
expert external guidance in his spiritual life,19 and the irony
of fate is that this man, who appeared to  his friends ‘as if he
had come from a country where no man lived’, was fully
conscious of his great spiritual need. ‘I confront alone’, he
says, ‘an immense problem: it is as if I am lost in a forest, a
primeval one. I need help. I need disciples: I need a
master.20 It would be so sweet to obey.’ And again: 
‘Why do I not ﬁnd among the living men who see higher
than I do and have to look down on me? Is it only that I have
made a poor search? And I have so great a longing for such.’

The truth is that the religious  and the scientiﬁc processes,
though involving diﬀerent  methods, are identical in their
ﬁnal aim. Both aim at reaching the most  real. In fact,
religion; for reasons which I have mentioned before, is far
more anxious to reach the ultimately  real than science.21

291
And to both the way to pure objectivity  lies through what
may be called the puriﬁcation of  experience. In order to
understand this we must make a distinction between
experience as a natural fact, signiﬁcant of the  normally
observable behaviour of Reality, and experience as
signiﬁcant of the inner nature  of Reality. As a natural fact it
is explained in the light of its  antecedents, psychological
and physiological; as signiﬁcant of the inner nature  of
Reality we shall have to apply criteria of a diﬀerent  kind to
clarify its meaning. In the domain of science we try  to
understand its meaning in reference to the external
behaviour of Reality; in the domain of religion we take it  as
representative of some kind of Reality and try to discover its
meanings in reference mainly to the inner nature  of that
Reality. The scientiﬁc and the religious processes are in a
sense parallel to each other. Both are really descriptions of
the same world with this diﬀerence only  that in the scientiﬁc
process the ego’s standpoint is necessarily exclusive,
whereas in the religious process the ego integrates its
competing tendencies and develops a single inclusive
attitude resulting  in a kind of synthetic transﬁguration  of his
experiences. A careful study of the nature and purpose of
these really complementary processes shows that both of
them are directed to the puriﬁcation  of experience in their
respective spheres. An illustration will make my meaning
clear. Hume’s criticism of our notion of cause must be
considered as a chapter in the history of science rather than
that of philosophy. True to the spirit of scientiﬁc empiricism
we are not entitled to work with  any concepts of a
subjective nature. The point of Hume’s criticism is to
emancipate empirical science from the concept of force
which, as he urges, has no foundation in senseexperience.
This was the ﬁrst attempt of the  modern mind to purify  the
scientiﬁc process.

292
Einstein’s mathematical view of the universe completes the
process of puriﬁcation started by Hume, and, true to  the
spirit of Hume’s criticism, dispenses with the concept of
force altogether.22 The passage I have quoted from the
great Indian saint shows that the practical  student of
religious psychology has a similar puriﬁcation in view. His
sense of objectivity is as keen as that of the scientists in his
own sphere of objectivity. He passes from experience to
experience, not as a mere spectator, but as a critical sifter
of experience, who by the rules of a peculiar technique,
suited to his sphere of inquiry, endeavours to eliminate  all
subjective elements, psychological or physiological, in the
content of his experience with a view ﬁnally  to reach what is
absolutely objective. This ﬁnal experience is the revelation
of a new lifeprocess - original, essential, spontaneous. The
eternal secret of the ego is that the  moment he reaches this
ﬁnal revelation he recognizes it as the ultimate  root of his
being without the slightest  hesitation. Yet in the experience
itself there is no mystery. Nor is there anything emotional  in
it. Indeed with a view to secure a wholly non-emotional
experience the technique of Islamic Sufâsm at least takes
good care to forbid the use of music in worship, and to
emphasize the necessity of daily congregational prayers in
order to counteract the possible anti-social eﬀects of solitary
contemplation. Thus the experience reached is a perfectly
natural experience and possesses a biological signiﬁcance
of the highest importance to the  ego. It is the human ego
rising higher than mere reﬂection, and mending  its
transiency by appropriating the  eternal. The only danger to
which the ego is exposed in this Divine quest is the possible
relaxation of his activity  caused by his enjoyment of and
absorption in the experiences that precede the ﬁnal
experience. The history of Eastern Sufâsm shows that this is
a real danger. This was the whole point of the reform
movement initiated  by the great Indian saint from whose

293
writings I have already quoted a passage. And the reason is
obvious. The ultimate aim of the ego is not to see
something, but to be something. It  is in the ego’s eﬀort to
be something that he discovers his ﬁnal opportunity  to
sharpen his objectivity and acquire a more fundamental  ‘I
am’ which ﬁnds evidence of its reality  not in the Cartesian ‘I
think’ but in the  Kantian ‘I can.’ The end of the ego’s quest
is not emancipation from the limitations  of individuality;  it
is, on the other hand, a more precise deﬁnition of it.  The
ﬁnal act is not an intellectual  act, but a vital act  which
deepens the whole being of the ego, and sharpens his will
with the creative assurance that the  world is not something
to be merely seen or known through concepts, but
something to be made and re-made by continuous action. It
is a moment of supreme bliss and also a moment of the
greatest trial for the  ego:

Art thou in the stage of ‘life.’  ‘death’, or  ‘death-in-life.’
Invoke the aid of three witnesses to verify thy  ‘Station.’

The ﬁrst witness is thine own consciousness - 
See thyself, then, with thine own light. 
The second witness is the consciousness of another ego -
See thyself, then, with the light  of an ego other than thee.
The third witness is God’s consciousness - 
See thyself, then, with God’s light. 
If thou standest unshaken in front of this light, 
Consider thyself as living and eternal as He! 
That man alone is real who dares - 
Dares to see God face to face! 
What is ‘Ascension’? Only a search for a witness 
Who may ﬁnally conﬁrm thy reality  - 
A witness whose conﬁrmation alone makes thee eternal. No
one can stand unshaken in His Presence; 
And he who can, verily, he is pure gold. 
Art thou a mere particle of dust?

294
Tighten the knot of thy ego; 
And hold fast to thy tiny  being! 
How glorious to burnish one’s ego. 
And to test its lustre in the  presence of the Sun! 
Re-chisel, then, thine ancient frame; And build up a new
being. Such being is real being; 
Or else thy ego is a mere ring of smoke!

J«vid N«mah
 Lecture VII  Notes:  IS RELIGION POSSIBLE?

Lecture delivered in a meeting of the ﬁfty-fourth  session of
the Aristotelian Society, London, held on 5 December 1932
with Professor J. Macmurray in the chair, followed by a
discussion by Professor Macmurray and Sir Francis
Younghusband - cf. ‘Abstract of the Minutes of the
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society for the Fifty-Fourth
Session’, in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (New
Series), XXXIII (1933), 341.

The Lecture was published in the said Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, pp. 47-64, as well as in The Muslim
Revival (Lahore), I/iv (Dec. 1932), 329-49.
1. This is a reference to Allama Iqbal’s own father, who was
a devout Sufâ; cf. S. Sulaim«n Nadvâ, Sair-i Afgh«nist«n, p.
179; also S. Nadhâr Niy«zâ, Iqb«l ke Àëîur, pp. 60-61. This
bold but religiously most signiﬁcant  statement, I personally
feel, is Allama’s own; it has been attributed  here to an
unnamed ‘Muslim Suﬁ’ perhaps only to make it more
presentable to the orthodoxy;  see M. Saeed Sheikh,
‘Philosophy of Man’, Iqbal Review, XIX/i (April-June 1988),
13-16, found expression in Allama’s verse, viz. Kulliy«t-i
Iqb«l (Urdë), B«l-i Jibrâl, Pt. II, Ghazal 60, v. 4:

Unless the Book’s each verse and part Be revealed unto
your heart, 

295
Interpreters, though much profound,  Its subtle points cannot
expound.

2. Cf. Critique of Pure Reason, Introduction, section vi, pp.
57-58; also Kemp Smith’s Commentary to Kant’s ‘Critique’,
pp. 68-70. Metaphysics, if it means knowledge of the
‘transcendent’, or of  things-in-themselves, was rejected by
Kant as dogmatic, because it does not begin with a critical
examination of human capacity for  such knowledge.
Reference may here be made to one of the very signiﬁcant
jottings by Allama Iqbal on the closing back page of his own
copy of Carl Rahn’s Science and the Religious Life (London,
1928), viz. ‘Is religion possible? Kant’s problem’; cf.
Muhammad Siddiq, Descriptive Catalogue of Allama Iqbal’s
Personal Library, pp. 21-22 and Plate No. 7.

3. The ‘principle of indeterminacy’  was so re-christened by
A. S. Eddington in his Nature of the Physical World, p. 220.
Now more often known as ‘principle of uncertainty’  or
‘uncertainty  principle’, it was ‘announced’ by the  physicist
philosopher Heisenberg in Zeitschrift fü r Physik, XLIII
(1927), 172-98. Broadly speaking, the principle states that
there is an inherent uncertainty  in describing sub-
microscopic process. For instance, if the position of an
electron is determined, there remains a measure of
uncertainty about its  momentum. As in a complete casual
description of a system both the properties  must needs be
accurately determined, many physicists and philosophers
took this ‘uncertainty’  to mean that  the principle of causality
had been overthrown.

4. Cf. Fusës al-Hikam (ed. ‘Afâfâ), I, 108, II, 11-12 - the words
of ‘the great Muslim Sufâ philosopher’ are: alkhalqu ma’qël-
un w’al-Haqqu mahsës-un mashhëd-un. It is noteworthy that
this profound mystical observation  is to be found in one of

296
Allama Iqbal’s verses composed as early as 1903; cf.
B«qây«t-i Iqbal, p. 146, v. 2.

5. For the Suﬁ`doctrine of plurality  of time and space stated
in Lecture III, pp. 60-61 and Lecture V, pp. 107-10 on the
basis of the then a rare Persian MS: Gh«yat al-Imk«n ﬁ
Dir«yat al-Mak«n (The Extent of Possibility in the Science of
Space) ascribed by Allama Iqbal to the eminent Sufâ poet
(Fakhr al-Dân) ‘Ir«qâ, see Lecture III, note 34; cf. also
Allama’s letter to Dr M. ‘Abdull«h Chaghat«‘â in Iqbalnamah,
II, 334.

6. Cf. John Passamore, A Hundred Years of Philosophy, p. 98.
In fact both these pronouncements on metaphysics are to
be found in Hans Vaihinger’s work referred to in the next
note. Vaihinger in his chapter on Nietzsche tells us that
‘Lange’s theory of metaphysics as a justiﬁed form  of ‘poetry’
made a deep impression upon Nietzsche’ (p. 341) and he
also alludes to Nietzsche’s patiently asking himself: ‘Why
cannot we learn to look upon metaphysics and religion as
the legitimate  play of grown ups?’ (p. 346, note). Both these
passages are underlined in Allama’s personal copy of
Vaihinger’s work (cf. M. Siddiq, op. cit., p. 6).

7. This is a reference to the title: The Philosophy of ‘As If’
(1924), translation of Die Philosophie des Als Ob (1911), a
work of the German Kantian philosopher Hans Vaihinger
(1852-1933). The ‘as if’ philosophy known as ﬁctionism is an
extreme form of James’s pragmatism or Dewey’s
instrumentalism; it,  however, traces its descent from Kant
through F. A. Lange and Schopenhauer. It holds that as
thought was originally an aid and instrument  in struggle for
existence it still is incapable of dealing with  purely
theoretical problems. Basic concepts and principles of
natural sciences, economic and political theory,
jurisprudence, ethics, etc., are merely convenient  ﬁctions

297
devised by the human mind for practical  purposes -
practical life and intuition,  in fact, are higher than
speculative thought.

One meets quite a few observations bearing on Vaihinger’s
doctrine in Allama’s writings, for  example, the following
passage in ‘Note on Nietzsche’: ‘According to Nietzsche the
‘I’ is a ﬁction. It  is true that looked at from  a purely
intellectual point  of view this conclusion is inevitable; Kant’s
Critique of Pure Reason ends in the conclusion that God,
immoratality  and freedom are mere ﬁctions though useful
for practical purposes. Nietzsche only follows Kant in this
conclusion’ (Thoughts and Reﬂections of Iqbal, ed. S. A.
Vahid, pp. 239-40). Also in ‘McTaggart’s Philosophy’: ‘Not
William James but Kant was the real founder of modern
pragmatism’ (ibid.,  p. 119).

8. For a comparative study of Indian, Greek, Muslim and
modern theories of atomism, cf. Encyclopaedia of Religion
and Ethics, II, 197-210, and for a more recent account of
modern atomism Niels Bohr’s article: ‘Atom’  in
Encyclopaedia Britannica, II, 641-47.

9. A. Eddington, The Nature of Physical World, chapter:
‘Science and Mysticism’, p. 323.

10. N«nikr«m Vasanmal Thad«nâ The Garden of the East,
pp. 63-64. Cf. Mathnawi, iii, 3901-06, 3912-14, for Rëmâ’s
inimitable lines on the theme  of ‘biological future  of man’
which Thad«nâ has presented here in a condensed form.
Thada`ni`in the  Preface to his book has made it clear that
‘The poems . . . are not translations of renderings . . .; they
are rather intended to recreate  the spirit and idea of each
master . . . .’

298
11. Cf. The Joyful Wisdom, Book V, where Nietzsche
denounces ‘nationalism and race-hatred (as) a scabies of
the heart and blood poisoning’, also The Twilight of the Idols,
chapter viii where he pronounces nationalism to be ‘the
strongest force against culture’.

12. Cf. pp. 145-46.

13. Reference here is to the misguided observations of the
orientalists to be found in such works as A. Sprenger, Des
Leben und die Lehre des Mohammed (1861), 1, 207; D.S.
Margoliouth, Mohammed and the Rise of Islam (1905), p. 46;
R. A. Nicholson, A Literary History of the Arabs (1907), pp.
147-48; and D. B. Macdonald, Religious Attitude and life in
Islam (1909), p. 46.

14. C. Jung, Contribution to Analytical Psychology, p. 225.
 15. Idem, Psychology of the Unconscious, pp. 42-43.

16. Cf. Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindâ, Maktëb«t-i Rabb«nâ, vol. I,
Letter 253, also Letters 34, 257 and 260. In all these letters
there is listing of the ﬁve  stations, viz. Qalb (the ‘heart’),
Rëh (the ‘spirit’), Sirr (the ‘inner’),  Khaﬁy (the ‘hidden’),  and
Akhf«; together they have also been named as in Letter 34
Jaw«hir-i Khamsah-i ÿlam-i Amr (‘Five Essences of the Realm
of the Spirit’). Cf. F. Rahman, Selected Letters of Shaikh
Ahmad Sirhindi, chapter iii (pp. 54-55).

17. Cf. Stray Reﬂections, ed. Dr Javid Iqbal, p. 42, where
Nietzsche has been named as a ‘great prophet of
aristocracy’; also article: ‘Muslim Democracy’  (Speeches,
Writings and Statements of Iqbal, pp. 123-24), where a
critical notice of Nietzsche’s ‘Aristocracy of Supremen’ ends
up in a very signiﬁcant rhetorical  question: ‘Is not, then, the
democracy of early Islam an experimental refutation  of the
ideas of Nietzsche?’

299
18. Cf. Kulliy«t-i Iqb«l (F«risâ), J«vâd N«mah, p. 741, vv. 4
and 3.
 Compare this with Allama Iqbal’s pronouncement on
Nietzsche in his highly valuable article: ‘McTaggart’s
Philosophy’:

A more serious thing happened to poor Nietzsche, whose
peculiar intellectual environment  led him to think  that his
vision of the Ultimate Ego could be realized in a world of
space and time. What grows only out of the inner depths of
the heart of man, he proposed to create by an artiﬁcial
biological experiment’ (Speeches, Writings and Statements
of Iqbal, p. 150).

Again in ‘Note on Nietzsche’: ‘Nietzsche’s Supreman is a
biological product. The Islamic perfect man is the product of
moral and spiritual forces’ (Thoughts and Reﬂections of
Iqbal, ed. S. A. Vahid, p. 242).

19. Allama Iqbal wished that Nietzsche were born in the
times of Shaikh Ahmad of Sirhind to receive spiritual light
from him see Kulliy«t-i Iqb«l (F«risâ), J«vâd N«mah, p. 741,
v. 10:
Would that he had lived in Ahmad’s time 
so that he might have attained  eternal joy. (trans. Arberry)

And he himself could be Nietzsche’s spiritual mentor, were
he be in Iqbal’s times; see Kulliy«t-i Iqb«l (Urdë), B«l-i Jibrâl,
Pt. II, Ghazal 33, v. 5.
 If that Frankish Sage Were present in this age
 Him Iqbal would teach
 God’s high place and reach (trans. S. Akbar Ali Shah).
 20. Cf. A. Schimmel, ‘Some Thoughts about Future Studies
of Iqbal,’ Iqbal, XXIV/iv (1977), 4.
 21. Cf. pp. 145-46.
 

300
22. Cf. Bertrand Russell, ‘Relativity: Philosophical
Consequences’, Section: ‘Force and Gravitation’,
Encyclopaedia Britannica, XIX, 99c.
 23. Cf. Kulliy«t-i Iqb«l (F«risâ), J«vâd N«mah, p. 607, vv. 10-
15 and p. 608, vv. 1-7.

Commenting on Allama’s translation of this passage A. J.
Arberry in the Introduction  to his translation of J«vâd Nam«h
observes that this ‘aﬀords a very  fair example of how close
and how remote Iqbal was prepared to make his own
version of himself’. And he adds that for comparison, in
addition to the translation  of this passage oﬀered by him,
the reader may like to consider its verse-paraphrase by
Shaikh Mahmud Ahmad in Pilgrimage of Eternity, II, 230-
256.

Bibliography
by Dr. Muhammad   Iqbal
 I. Works of Allama   Iqbal
(A) Works  in  Prose

Bedil in the Light of Bergson , ed. and annotated by Dr.
Tehsin Firaqi, Lahore, 1988.The Development of Metaphysics
in Persia (a contribution to the history of  Muslim
philosophy), London, 1908. Reprinted Lahore, 1954, 1959,
1964.

Ilm al-Iqtisad, Lahore, 1903. Rep. Karachi, 1962.

Six Lectures on the Reconstruction of Religious Thought in
Islam , Lahore, 1930. 2nd edn., with revision at about six
places and quite a few proof-reading corrections and
changes, and more importantly with  the addition of Lecture:
‘Is Religion Possible?’ and an Index, published under the
title: The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam,
London, 1934. Reprinted Lahore, 1944, many later edns.

301
Reprinted Delhi, 1974. French trans. by de Eva Meyerovitch:
Reconstruire la pensé e religieuse de l’Islam, Paris, 1955.
Arabic trans. by ‘Abb«s Mahmëd: Tajdâd al-Tafkâr al-Dân ﬁ’l-
Islam, Cairo, 1955. Urdu trans. by Sayyid Nadhâr Niy«zâ:
Tashkâl-i Jadâd Il«hây«t-i Isl«mâyah, Lahore, 1958. Persian
trans. by Ahmad Aram, Ihya-i Fikr-i Din dar Islam, Tehran,
1967. Also translated at least in ﬁve more languages.

The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam , ed. and
annotated by M. Saeed Sheikh, Lahore, 1986, reprinted
Lahore, 1989; Spanish trans. by Jose Esteban Calderon: La
Reconstruction del Pensamiento Religioso en el Islam,
Lahore 1989; Stray Reﬂections, A Note-Book of Allama Iqbal
(1910), ed. by Javid Iqbal, Lahore, 1961.

T«râkh-i Tasawwuf (1916), ed. by S«bir Kalurvâ, Lahore,
1985.
 (B) Major Poetical Works  (With  English Translation)
 Asr«r-i Khudâ trans. by R. A. Nicholson: The Secrets of the
Self, London, 1920; rev. edn., Lahore, 1940, many later
edns.

B«l-i Jibrâl (1935), trans. of the earlier two Parts (16 + 61
Ghazals) by Syed Akbar Ali Shah: Gabriel’s Wing, Islamabad,
1979; trans. of six quatrains and of twenty-three poems
from the last part (as also of some poems from other works)
by V. G. Kiernan: Poems from Iqbal, London, 1955 (Part II).

J«vâd N«m«h (1932), trans. by Shaikh Mahmud Ahmad: The
Pilgrimage of Eternity, Lahore, 1961, 1977; also by Arthur J.
Arberry: Javid-Nama, London, 1966; trans. of the concluding
section: Khit«b ba J«vâd by B. A. Dar: Address to Javid,
Karachi, 1971.

P«y«m-i Mashriq (1923), trans. by M. Hadi Hussain: A
Message from the East, Lahore, 1977.

302
 Rumëz-i Bekhudâ, trans. by Arthur H. Arberry: The Mysteries
of Selﬂessness, London, 1953.

Zabër-i ‘Ajam (1927), trans. by Arthur J. Arberry: Persian
Psalms, Lahore, 1948; trans. of the all too important
mathnawâ Gulshan-i R«z-i Jadâd (New Garden of Mystery) as
well as Bandagâ N«m«h (Book of Servitude), the closing
parts of this work, by Bashir Ahmad Dar, Lahore, 1964; also
by M. Hadi Hussain: The New Rose Garden of Mystery and
the Book of Slaves, Lahore, 1969.

Complete poetical works in Persian and Urdu published in 2
vols. Kulliy«t-i Iqb«l: F«risâ & Kulliy«t-i Iqb«l: Urdu, Lahore,
1973.
 (C) Addresses,  Articles,   Letters,   etc.
(i)  Compilations   in  English
 Discourses of Iqbal, ed. by Shahid Hussain Razzaqi, Lahore,
1979.
 Iqbal by Atiya Begum, Bombay, 1947.
 Letters and Writings of Iqbal, ed. by B. A. Dar, Karachi, 1967.
 Letters of Iqbal, ed. by Bashir Ahmad Dar, Lahore, 1978.
 Letters of Iqbal to Jinnah, with a Foreword by (Quaid-i-Azam)
M. A. Jinnah, Lahore, 1942.

Mementos of Iqbal , compiled by Rahim Bakhsh Shaheen,
Lahore, n.d. Speeches, Writings and Statements of Iqbal ed.
by Latif Ahmad Sherwani (3rd rev. and enlarged edn.),
Lahore, 1977.

Thoughts and Reﬂections of Iqbal, ed. by Syed Abdul Vahid,
Lahore, 1964.
 (ii) Major  Compilations    in Urdu
Anw«r-i Iqb«l, ed. by Bashir Ahmad Dar, Karachi, 1967.
 Guft«r-i Iqb«l, ed. by M. Rafâq Afîal, Lahore, 1969.
 Iqb«ln«mah (Majmë’ah-i Mak«tâb-i Iqb«l), ed. by Shaikh ‘At«
Ull«h, 2 Parts, Lahore, 1945, 1951.

303
 Khutët-i Iqbal, ed. and annotated by Rafâ’-ud-Dân H«shimâ,
Lahore, 1976.
 Maq«l«t-i Iqb«l, ed. by Sayyid ‘Abdul V«hid Mu’ânâ, Lahore,
1963.
 Rëh-i Mak«tâb-i Iqb«l, ed. by M. ‘Abdull«h Quraishâ, Lahore,
1977 (a useful compendium of 1233 letters  arranged
chronologically).
 (II) SECONDARY WORKS AND ARTICLES REFERRED
 TO IN NOTES AND TEXT
 (A) Works
 ‘Abd al-Q«dir, ‘Alâ Hasan, Nazarah ‘ÿmmah ﬁ T«râkh al-Fiqh
al-Isl«mâ, Cairo, 1942.
 ‘Abd al-Quddës Gangohâ, Lat«’if-i Quddësâ, ed. by Shaikh
Rukn al-Dân, Delhi, 1311 A. H.
 ‘Abd al-Sal«m Khurshâd, Dr, Sargudhasht-i Iqb«l, Lahore,
1977.
 ‘Abdullah Anwar Beg, The Poet of the East, Lahore, 1939.
 ‘Abdull«h Chaghat«‘â, Dr, Iqb«l ki Suhbat Men, Lahore,
1977.
 ‘Abë D«wëd, Sulaiman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijist«nâ, Kit«b al-
Sunan, 4 vols. in 2, Cairo, 1935; English trans. by Ahmad
Hasan, Sunan ‘Abë D«wëd, 3 vols., Lahore, 1984.

Abë Rashâd Sa‘âd b. Muhammad b. Sa‘âd al-Nais«bërâ,
Kit«b al-Mas«’il ﬁ’l-Khil«f bain Basriyyân wa’l-Baghd«diyyân
ed. and trans. into German by Arthur Biram: Die
atomistische Substanzenlehre aus dem Buch der
Streitfragen Basrensern und Baghdadensern, Leyden, 1902.

Aghnides, Nicolas P., Mohammedan Theories of Finance
(with an Introduction to  Mohammedan Law and a
Bibliography), New York, 1916; rep. 1969.
 Ahmad b. Hanbal, Musnad, 6 vols., Beirut, n.d. Ahmad
Hasan, The Doctrine of Ijm«‘ in Islam, Islamabad, 1976.
 Ahmad Nabi Khan, Dr (ed.), Relics of Allama Iqbal
(Catalogue), Islamabad, Ministry of Culture and Tourism,

304
Government of Pakistan, 1982.
 Ahmad Sirhindâ, Shaikh, Maktëb«t-i Im«m-i Rabb«nâ, Vol. I,
Lahore, n.d.

‘Ain al-Qud«t Hamad«nâ, Gh«yat al-Imk«n ﬁ Dir«yat al-
Mak«n, ed. by Rahâm Farmanish in his compilation Ahw«l-o-
Ath«r ‘Ain al-Qud«t, Tehran, 1338(S); Eng. trans. based on
collation with Rampur Library MS by A. H. Kamali, Karachi,
1971.

Alexander, Samuel, Space, Time and Deity (The Giﬀord
Lectures at Glasgow, 1916-1918), 2 Vols., London, 1920.
 al-Amidâ, Saif al-Dân, Al-Ihk«m ﬁ UÄël al AÁk«m, 4 Vols.,
Beirut, 1400/1980.
 Arberry, A. J. (tr.) Muslim Saints and Mystics: Episodes from
the Tadhkirat al-Auliy«’ (Memorial of the Saints) by Farâd al-
Dân al- ‘AÇÇ«r, London, 1979.
 ---, Revelation and Reason in Islam (The Forwood Lectures
for 1956), London, 1957.
 Asad, Muhammad, The Message of the Qur’«n, Gibralter,
1980.
 al-Ash‘arâ, Abu’l-Hasan ‘Alâb. Ism«’âl, Maq«l«t al-Isl«miyân,
ed. by Muhammad Muhy alDân ‘Abd al-Hamâd, 2 vols.,
Cairo, 1369/1950.
 Ashnawi`, Shaikh T«j al-Dân Mahmëd b. Khud«d«d, Gh«yat
al-Imk«n ﬁ Ma’rifat al-Zam«n wa’l-Mak«n, ed. by Nadhr
S«birâ, Campbellpur, 1401 A.H.
 Ashraf ‘Alâ Th«nawâ, Maul«n«, Al-Hâlat al-N«jizah lil-Halâlat
al-’ÿjizah, Deoband, 1351 (1931).
 Atiyeh, George N., Al-Kindi: The Philosopher of the Arabs,
Rawalpindi, 1966.
 ‘AÇÇ«r, Farâd al-Dân, ManÇiq al-ñair, Isfahan, 1334(S).
 Augustine, Saint, The Confessions of St. Augustine, trans. by
E. B. Pusey, New York, 1945.
 Becon, Roger, Opus Majus, Eng. trans. by R. B. Burke, 2
vols., Philadelphia, 1928.

305
 Bahiy, Muhammad al-, Al-Fikr al-Isl«mi al-Àadâth wa Silat
bi’l-Istâm«r, Cairo.
 al-Baqill«nâ, Abë Bakr Muhammad b. al-Tayyib, Kit«b al-
Tamhâd, ed. by Richard J. McCarthy, Beyrouth, 1957.
 Barstrow, Robbins Wolcott (ed.), The Macdonald
Presentation Volume, Princeton, 1933.

Bergson, Henri Louis, Creative Evolution, trans. by Arthur
Mitchell, London, 1911. 
---, Matter and Memory, trans. by Nancy Margaret Paul & W.
Scott Palmer (pseud), London, 1911.

---, Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of
Consciousness, trans. by F. L. Pogson, London, 1910.
 Berkes, Niyazi, The Development of Secularism in Turkey,
Montreal, 1964.
 al-Bârënâ, Abë Raih«n, Al-Qanën al-Mas‘ëdâ, vol. I,
Hyderabad (Deccan), 1373/1954.
 Al-Bârënâ Commemoration Volume (A. H. 362-A.H. 1362),
Calcutta, Iran Society, 1951.
 Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna, The Secret Doctrine: The
Synthesis of Science, Religion and Philosophy, 6 vols., Adyar
(Madras), 1971.
 de Boer, Tjitze J., Geschichte der Philosophie im Islam
(Stuttgart, 1901),  trans. by Edward R. Jones: The History of
Philosophy in Islam, London, 1903.
 Bonola, Roberto, Non-Euclidean Geometry: A Critical and
Historical, Study of Its Development, Chicago, 1912.
 Bradley, Francis Herbert, Appearance and Reality: A
Metaphysical Essay, Oxford, 1930.
 ---, Ethical Studies, Oxford, 1927.
 ---, The Principles of Logic, 2 vols., Oxford, 1922.
 Briﬀault, Robert, The Making of Humanity, London, 1923.
 Brockelmann, Carl, Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur, 2
vols., Leiden, 1943, 1949; Supplementbä nde, 3 vols.,
Leiden, 1937, 1938, 1942.

306
Browne, Robert T., The Mystery of Space (A Study of the
Hyperspace Movement in the Light of the Evolution of New
Psychic Faculties and an Inquiry into the Genesis and
Essential Nature of Space), New York & London, 1919.

Brunschvig, R., La Berberie orientale sous les Hafasides,
Paris, 1947.
 al-Bukharâ, Abë ‘Abd All«h Muhammad b. Ism«’âl, ÂaÁâÁ al-
Bukh«râ, Arabic text with Eng. trans. by Dr. Muhammad
Muhsin Khan, 9 vols., Lahore, 1979.
 Burnet, John, Greek Philosophy: Thales to Plato, London,
1961.
 Cajori, F., A History of Elementary Mathematics, New York,
1917.
 Carr, W. Wildon, The General Principle of Relativity in Its
Philosophical and Historical Aspect, London, 1920.
 ---, (ed.), Life and Finite Individuality, London, 1918.
 ---, A Theory of Monads: Outlines of the Philosophy of the
Principle of Relativity, London, 1922.
 Carra de Vaux, Baron Bernard, Avicenne, Paris, 1900.
 Cornford, F. M., Plato’s Theory of Knowledge (The
Theaetetus and the Sophist of Plato, trans. with a running
commentary), London, 1946.
 Coulson, N. J., A History of Islamic Law, Edinburgh, 1964.
 D«rimâ, Abë Muhammad ‘Abd All«h b. ‘Abd al-Rahm«n,
Sunan al-D«rimâ, 2 vols., Damascus, 1349/1930.
 Daw«nâ, Jalal al-Dân, Ris«lat al-Zaur«’, Cairo, 1326/1908.
 Denison, John Hopkins, Emotion as the Basis of Civilization,
New York & London, 1928.
 Descartes, Rene, The Geometry, trans. by D. E. Smith & M.
L. Latham, Chicago, 1925.
 ---,The Philosophical Works of Descartes, trans. by E. S.
Haldane & G.R.T. Ross, 2 vols., London, 1911, 1912.
 Durant, Will, The Age of Faith, New York, 1950.
 ---, Caesar and Christ, New York, 1944.
 

307
Eddington, Arthur Stanley, The Nature of the Physical World
(Giﬀord Lectures 1927), London, 1928.
 ---, Space, Time and Gravitation: An Outline of the General
Relativity Theory, Cambridge, 1920.
 Eliade, Mircea (Editor in Chief), The Encyclopedia of Religion,
16 vols, New York & London, 1987.
 Encyclopaedia Britannica, 24 vols., Chicago, London &
Toronto, 1953.
 Encyclopaedia of Islam, The, 4 vols., Leiden & London, 1913-
1934; Supplement (in 5 parts), 1934-1938.
 Encyclopaedia of Islam, The, New Edition, Leiden & London,
1954 (in progress).
 Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 13 vols., Edinburgh &
New York, 1908-1927.
 Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, 14 vols., in 8, New
York, 1950.
 Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, The, 8 vols. in 4, New York &
London, 1967. Encyclopedia of Philosophy, The, 4 vols., New
York, 1984.
 Encyclopedia of Religion, An, ed. by Vergilius Ferm, New
York, 1945.
 Fahri, F. Ziyaeddin, Ziya Gö kalp: sa vie et sa sociologie,
Paris, 1935.
 Fakhry, Majid, A History of Islamic Philosophy, New York &
London, 1970.
 ---, Islamic Occasionalism and Its Critique by Averroes and
Aquinas, London, 1958.
 Farnell, Lewis Richard, The Attributes of God (The Giﬀord
Lectures delivered in the University of St. Andrews in the
year 1924-25), London, 1925.
 Feigel, Herbert & May Brodbeck (eds.), Readings in the
Philosophy of Science, New York, 1953.
 Fischer, August, Aus der religiö sen Reformbewegung in der
Tü rkei, Leipzig, 1922.
 Flint, Robert, History of the Philosophy of History in France,
Belgium and Switzerland, Edinburgh, 1893.

308
 Fu’«d ‘Abd al-B«qâ, Muhammad, al-Mu‘jam al-Mufahras li
Alf«z al-Qur’«n al-Karâm, Cairo, 1364/1945.
 Fyzee, Asaf A. A., Outlines of Muhammedan Law, London,
1955.

al-GhaZz«lâ, Abë H«mid Muhammad b. Muhammad, Al-
Munqidh min al-Dal«l, trans. by Claud Field: Confessions of
al-Ghazali, London, 1909, also in W. Montgomery Watt, The
Faith and Practice of al-GhazZ«lâ, London, 1953, pp. 19-85.

---, Al-Mustasf«min ‘Ilm al-UÄël, 2 vols., Cairo, 1937.
 ---, Al-Qist«s al-Mustaqâm, trans. with Intro. and Notes by D.
P. Brewster: The Just Balance, Lahore, 1978.
 ---, Tah«fut al-Fal«sifah, trans. by Sabih Ahmad Kamali:
Incoherence of the Philosophers, Lahore, 1958.
 Ghul«m Mustaf« Kh«n, Iqb«l aur Qur’«n, Lahore, 1977.
 Gibb, H. A. R., Modern Trends in Islam (The Haskell Lectures
in Comparative Religion, 1945), New York, 1947, reprint
1978.
 ---, & J. H. Kramers (eds), Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam,
Leiden & London, 1953.
 Gillispie, Charles Coulston (ed.), Dictionary of Scientiﬁc
Biography, 16 vols., New York, 1970-80.
 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang Von, Conversation of Goethe with
Eckermann and Soret, trans. by John Oxenford, London,
1901.
 Gö kalp, Ziya, Ziya Gö kalp kü lliyati’i: Sü rler ve halk
masallari, ed. by F. A. Tansel, Ankara, 1952.
 ---,Turkish Nationalism and Western Civilization: Selected
Essays of Ziya Gö kalp, trans. & ed. by Niyazi Berkes,
London & New York, 1959.
 Goldziher, Ignaz, Muhammadanische Studien, 2 vols., (1889-
90), Hildsheim, 1961; trans. by C. R. Barber & S. M. Stern,
Muslim Studies, 2 vols., London, vol. I: 1967, vol. II: 1971.
 ---,The Z«hirâs: Their Doctrine and Their History, trans. by
Wolfgang Behn, Leiden, 1971.

309
 Gunn, J. Alexander, The Problem of Time: A Historical and
Critical Study, London, 1929.
 Gwatkin, H. M. & J. P. Whitney (eds.), The Cambridge
Medieval History, 2 vols., London, 1911, 1913.
 À«jâ Khalâfah, Mustaf«b. ‘Abd All«h, Kashf al-Zunën ‘an al-
As«mi’l-Kutub wa’l-Funën, 2 vols., Istanbul, 1941-43.
 al-Hajwâ, Muhammad b. al-Hasan, Al-Fikr al-S«mâfâ T«râkh
al-Fiqh al-Isl«mâ, 4 vols., Rabat-Fez-Tunis, 1345-49/1926-31.
 Haldane, Viscount Richard Burdon, The Reign of Relativity,
London, 1921.

al-Hall«j, Husain b. Mansër, Kit«b al-Taw«sin, Arabic text and
Persian version of Baqlâ, ed. by Louis Massignon, Paris,
1913; French translation by L. Massignon in La passion
d’alÀall«j, II, 830-93; Eng. trans. by Aisha Abd Ar-Rahman,
Berkeley & London, 1974; also in Gilani Kamran: Ana al-
Haqq Reconsidered, Lahore, 1398 A. H., pp. 55-108.

Hamidullah, Dr M. (ed.), Sahifa Hammam-Bin-Munabbih
(Arabic text with Urdu trans.), Hyderabad (Deccan), 1956.
 Hanâf Nadvâ, Muhammad, ‘Aqliy«t-i Ibn-i Taimâyyah,
Lahore, 1981.
 Hassan, Riﬀat, The Sword and the Sceptre (A collection of
writings on Iqbal), Lahore, 1977.
 Heath, Sir Thomas Little (tr.), The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s
Elements, vol. I, Cambridge, 1926.
 Heyd, Uriel, Foundations of Turkish Nationalism: The Life and
Teachings of Ziya Gö kalp, London, 1950.
 Hitti, Philip Khuri, History of the Arabs, London & New York,
1951.
 Hocking, William Ernest, The Meaning of God in Human
Experience, New Haven, 1955.
 Hoernle, R. F. Alfred, Matter, Life, Mind and God (Five
Lectures on Contemporary Tendencies of Thought), London,
1923.
 

310
Holy Bible, The (Authorised King James Version), London &
New York, n.d.
 Horten, Max, Die Hauptlehren des Averroes nach seiner
Shrift: Die Widerlegung des Gazali, Bonn, 1913.
 Hourani, George F. (ed.), Essays on Islamic Philosophy and
Science, Albany, 1975.
 al-Hujwârâ, ‘Alâb. ‘Uthm«n, Kashf al-Mahjëb (Iran Pakistan
Institute of Persian Studies, Publication no. 29), Lahore,
1398/1978; Eng. trans. by R. A. Nicholson, London, 1911.
 Ibn AbâZar, Abu’l-Hasan ‘Alâb. ‘Abd All«h, Raud al-Qirt«s
(Upsala, 1843); French trans. by A. Beaumier: Histoire des
souverains du Magreb . . .’ Paris, 1860.
 Ibn al-‘Arabâ, Muhy al-Dân, Fusës al-Hikam, ed. & annotated
by Abu’l-’Al«’Afâfâ, 2 vols., Cairo, 1365/1946.
 Ibn Hazm, ‘Alâb. Ahmad, Kit«b al-Fisal ﬁ’l-Milal wa’l-Ahw«’
wa’-l-Nihal, 4 vols., Cairo, 1311-1312.
 ---, Al-Taqrâb li-Hadd al-Mantiq, ed. by Dr Ihsan Abbas (from
the only MS 6814, alMaktabat al-Ahmadâyah, Tunis), Beirut,
1959.
 Ibn Jam«’ah, Badr al-Dân, Tahrâr al-Ahk«m ﬁ’l-Tadbâr Ahl al-
Isl«m, ed. & trans. into German by Hans Koﬂer in Islamica,
VI (1934), 349-414 and VII (1935), 1-64.
 Ibn Khaldën, The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History,
trans. by Franz Rosenthal, 3 vols., New York & London, 1958.
 Ibn M«jah, Abë’Abd All«h Muhammad b. Yazâd, Sunan, ed.
by Muhammad Fu’a`d ‘Abd alBa`qi, 2 vols., Cairo, 1952-53.

Ibn Maskawaih, Abu ‘Alâ Ahmad, Al-Fauz al-Asghar, Cairo,
1325 A.H.; Eng. trans. by Khwaja Abdul Hamid in Ibn
Maskawaih: A Study of His Al-Fauz al-Asghar, Part I, Lahore,
1946.

Ibn Qutaibah, ‘Abd All«h b. Muslim, Kitab al-Ma‘«rif, ed. by
Tharwat ‘Uk«shah, Cairo, 1960 (Urdu trans. by Dr Zia-ul-
Haq: Ph. D. Dissertation, University of the Punjab, Lahore,
1950).

311
 ---, Kit«b Ta’wâl Mukhtalif al-Hadâth, ed. by Faraj All«h
Zaki`al-Kurdi`, et. al., Cairo, 1326 A.H.
 Ibn Rushd, Averroes’ Tah«fut al-Tah«fut (The Incoherence of
the Incoherence), trans. with Intro. and Notes by Simon van
den Bergh, 2 vols., London, 1954.
 Ibn Taimâyyah, Kitab al-Radd ‘al«al-ManÇiqiyân, ed. by ‘Abd
al-Samad Sharaf al-Di`n alKurtubi, Bombay, 1949.
 Ikram, S. M., Modern Muslim India and the Birth of Pakistan,
Lahore, 1977.
 Iqbal As A Thinker (Essays by Eminent Scholars), Lahore, Sh.
Muhammad Ashraf, 1944.
 Isfr«’âni, Abë Ish«q Ibrahâm, Al-Tabsir ﬁ’l-Din wa Tamâz al-
Firqat al-N«jâyah ‘an al-Firaq al-Halikân, Cairo, 1374 A.H.
 Isl«hâ, Amân Ahsan, Tadabbar-i-Qur’«n (1967-1980), Fourth
reprint, 9 vols., Lahore, 1989.
 James, William, Human Immortality (Ingersoll Lecture at
Harvard University for 1898), London, 1917.
 ---, The Principles of Psychology, 2 vols. in 1, New York,
1950.
 ---, The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human
NatureThe Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in
Human Nature 1902), London & New York, 1902.
J«mâ, ‘Abd al-Rahm«n, Law«ih (A Treatise on Sufâsm) ed. &
trans. by E. H. Whinﬁeld and Mirza M. Kazwini, London,
1906. Rep., Lahore, 1978.
 Jung, Carl Gustav, Contribution to Analytical Psychology,
trans. by H. G. & Cary F. Baynes, London, 1928.
 ---, Psychology of the Unconscious, trans. by B. M. Hinkle,
London, 1919.
 Kahh«lah, ‘Umar Riîa, Mu’jam al-Mu‘alliﬁn: Tar«jim
Musannifâ’l-Kutub al-’Arabâyyah, 15 vols. in 8, Damascus,
1957-61.
 Kant, Immanuel, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. by N. Kemp
Smith, London, 1953.
 Khuda Bukhsh, Salahuddin, Politics in Islam (von Kremer’s
‘Staatsidee des Islam’: enlarged and ampliﬁed), Lahore,

312
1948.
 al-Khudarâ, Muhammad, T«râkh al-Tashrâ’ al-Isl«mâ, (Cairo,
1926) Urdu trans. by ‘Abd alSalam Nadvâ: Tarâkh-i Fiqh-i
Islami, A’zamgarh, 1346 A.H.
 Kirkpatrick, F. (ed.), Lectures on the History of the
Nineteenth Century, Cambridge, 1904.
 Kohler, W., The Mentality of Apes, trans. by Ella Winter,
London, 1924.
 Lammens, H., Islam, Beliefs and Institutions, trans. by Sir E.
Denison Ross, London, 1929.
 Lane, Edward William, An Arabic-English Lexicon, Parts 1-8,
8 vols., ed. by Stanley Lanepoole, New York, 1950-56.
 Lewes, George Henry, The Biographical History of
Philosophy, London, 1857.
 Macdonald, Duncan Black, Development of Muslim
Theology, Jurisprudence and Constitutional Theory, New
York, 1903; rep. Lahore, 1960.
 ---, The Religious Attitude and Life in Islam (The Haskell
Lectures on Comparative Religion, 1906), Beyrouth, 1965.
 McTaggart, John McTaggart Ellis, Nature of Existence, ed. by
C. D. Broad, Cambridge, 1927.
 ---, Philosophical Studies, ed. by S. V. Keeling, London, 1934.
 ---, Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic, Cambridge, 1922.

Mahmansani, Sobhi (Mahmas«nâ, Subhâ), Falsafat al-Tashrâ’
ﬁ’l-Isl«m (Beirut, 1952); trans.  by Farhat J. Ziadeh: The
Philosophy of Jurisprudence in Islam, Leiden, 1961; Urdu
trans. by M. Ahmad Riîvâ: Falsafah-i Shari‘at- Islam, Lahore,
1981.

Maimonides, Moses, The Guide of the Perlexed, trans. by
Shlomo Pines, with introductory essay by Leo Strauss,
Chicago, 1963.

al-Marghin«nâ, Burh«n al-Dân, Al-Hidayah: Sharh Bid«yat al-
MubtadâAl-Hidayah: Sharh Bid«yat al-Mubtadâ 27 A.H.,

313
trans. by Charles Hamilton: The Hedaya or Guide: A
Commentary on the Mussulman Laws, 2nd edn., London,
1870; rep. Lahore, 1957.

Margoliouth, David Samuel, The Early Development of
Mohammedanism, London, 1914.
 ---, Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, New York, 1905.
 Mas’ëd; Dr Kh«lid, Iqb«l ka Tasawwur-i Ijtih«d, Islamabad,
1985.
 Merchant, Muhammad Valibhai, A Book of Quranic Laws,
Lahore, 1947.
 Metz, Rudolf, A Hundred Years of British Philosophy, trans.
from German by J. W. Harvey, et. al., and ed. by J. H.
Muirhead, London, 1938.
 Monzavi, Ahmad, A Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts, vol. II,
Pt. I, Tehran, 1934(S).
 Morgan, C. L., Emergent Evolution, London, 1923.
 Munk, Salomon, Mé langes de philosophie Juive et arabe,
Paris, 1859.
 Murphy, Gardner, Historical Introduction to Modern
Psychology, London, 1949.
 Muslim, Abu’l-Husain b. al-Hajj«j al-Nâs«bërâ, Al-ÂahâÁ, 8
vols., Cairo, 1334 A.H.; Eng. trans. by ‘Abdul Hamâd
Siddâqâ: Sahih Muslim, 4 vols., Lahore, 1976-81.
 Nadhâr Niy«zâ, Sayyid, Iqb«l ke Huîër, Karachi, 1971.
 Nas«’â, Ahmad b. Shu’aib, Sunan, Cairo, 1930.
 al-Nashsh«r, ‘Alâ S«mâ, Man«hij al-Bahth ‘inda Mufakkiri’l-
Isl«m wa Naqd al-Muslimân lilMantiq al-Aristët«lâsâ, Cairo,
1367/1947.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, An Introduction to Islamic
Cosmological Doctrines: Conceptions of Nature and Methods
Used for the Study by the Ikhwan al-Safa’, al-Biruni and Ibn
Sina, Cambridge (Mass.), 1964.

314
Naumann, Joseph Friedrick, Briefe Ü ber Religion, Berlin,
1916.
 ---, Mitteleuropa, trans. by C. M. Meredith: Central Europe,
London, 1916.
 New Encyclopaedia Britannica, The (Propaedia, Micropaedia
and Macropaedia), 30 Vols., Chicago, London, Toronto, etc.,
1973, 1985.
 Newton, Sir Isaac, The Mathematical Principles of Natural
Philosophy, trans. by Andrew Motte, 3 vols., London, 1803.
 Nicholson, Reynold A., A Literary History of the Arabs,
Cambridge, 1953.
 Nietsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, The Complete Works of
Friedrich Nietzsche, trans. by W. A. Haussmann, et. al., ed.
by Oscar Levy, 18 Vols., Edinburgh, 1909-14.
 Ouspensky, Peter Demianovich, Tertium Organum: A Key to
the Enigmas of the World, (1912), trans. by Nicholas
Bessaraboﬀ & Claude Bragdon, London, 1926.
 Passamore, John, A Hundred Years of Philosophy,
Harmondsworth, 1975.
 Rafâ’ al-Dân Hashimâ, Dr. Tas«nâf-i Iqb«l Ka Tahqâqi-o-
TauîâÁâ MuÇ«la’ah, Lahore, 1982.
 al-Raghib, Abu’l-Q«sim al-Husain, Al-Mufrad«t ﬁ Gharâb al-
Qur’«n, Beirut, n.d.
 Rahâm Bakhsh Sh«hân, Aur«q-i Gumgashtah, Lahore, 1975.
 ---, Mementos of Iqbal, Lahore n.d.
 Rahm«n, Fazlur, Selected Letters of Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi,
Karachi, 1968.
 ---, Major Themes of the Qur’«n, Minneapolis, 1980.
 Raschid, M. Salman, Iqbal’s Concept of God, London, 1981.
 R«zâ, Fakhr al-Dân, Al-Mab«hith al-Mashriqâyyah, vol. I,
Hyderabad (Deccan), 1343 A.H.
 ---, Al-Tafsâr al-Kabâr, 8 vols., Cairo, 1307 A.H.
 Renan, Ernst, Averroes et l’averroisme: essai historique,
Paris, 1882; Urdu trans. by Ma’shë`q Husain: Ibn-i Rushd wa
Falsafah-i Ibn-i Rushd, Hyderabad (Deccan), 1347/1929.
 

315
Rescher, Nicholas, The Development of Arabic Logic,
Pittsburgh, 1964.
 Rodwell, J. M. (tr.), The Koran (1861), London, 1948.
 Ross, William David, Aristotle, London, 1923.
 Rougier, Louis, Philosophy and the New Physics: An Essay on
the Relativity Theory and the Theory of Quanta, authorised
trans. by Morton Masius, Philadelphia, 1921.

Royce, Josiah, The World and the Individual (Giﬀord
Lectures), 2 vols., London, 1900. Rëmâ, Maul«n« Jal«l al-
Dân, Mathnawâ-i Ma’nawâ, text ed. and trans. and
commentary by Reynold A. Nicholson: The Mathnawâof
Jal«lu’ddân Rëmâ, 8 vols., London, 1925-40.

Runes, D. D. (ed.), The Dictionary of Philosophy, New York,
1982.
 Russell, Bertrand, History of Western Philosophy, London,
1949.
 ---, Mysticism and Logic, London, 1949.
 ---, Our Knowledge, of the External World, London, 1949.
 Sa‘âd Ahmad Akbar«badâ, Khutab«t-i Iqb«l per ek Naïr,
Srinagar, 1983; reprinted, Lahore, 1987.
 Sa‘âd b. Ahmad al-Andalusi, ñabaq«t al-Umam, Beirut, n.d.
 al-Sa‘âdâ, ‘Abd al-Muta‘«l, Al-Mujaddidën ﬁ’l-Isl«m, Cairo,
n.d.
 al-Sal«wâ, Ahmad b. Kh«lid al-N«sirâ, Al-Istiqs«’ li Akhb«r
Duwal al-Maghrib al-Aqs«, vol. II, al-D«r al-Baid«, 1954.
 S«lik, ‘Abd al-Majâd, Dhikr-i Iqb«l, Lahore, 1955.
 Salâm Akhtar (ed.), Fikr-i Iqb«l Ke Munawwar Goshay,
Lahore, 1973.
 al-Sarakhsâ, Shams al-A’immah AbëBakr Muhammad b.
Ahmad, UÄël al-Sarakhsâ, Cairo, 1373/1954.
 Sarkhwush, Muhammad Afdal (ed.) Kalim«t al-Shu‘ar«’,
Lahore, n.d.
 Sarton, George, Introduction to the History of Science, 3
vols. in 5, Baltimore, 1927-48.

316
 Sayyid Sulaim«n Nadvâ, Sair-i Afgh«nist«n, Hyderabad
(Deccan), 1945.
 Schacht, Joseph, The Origins of Muhammedan
Jurisprudence, Oxford, 1953.
 ---, with C. E. Bosworth (eds.), The Legacy of Islam, 2nd
edn., Oxford, 1974.
 Schilpp, P. A. (ed.), Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist,
New York, 1951.
 Schimmel, Annemarie, Gabriel’s Wing (A Study in to the
Religious Ideas of Sir Muhammad Iqbal), Leiden, 1963.
 ---, Mystical Dimensions of Islam, Chapel Hill, 1975.
 Schmö lders, August, Essai sur les Ecoles philosophiques
chez les Arabes, et notament sur la doctrine d’Algazzali,
Paris, 1842.

Schopenhauer, Arthur, World as Will and Idea, trans. by R. B.
Haldane & John Kemp, vol. I, London, 1923. 
Servier, Andre, Islam and the Psychology of Musulman,
trans. by A. S. Moss-Blandell, London, 1924.

Shabistarâ, Mahmëd, Gulshan-i R«z, ed. and trans. by E. H.
Whinﬁeld: Gulshan-i R«z: The Mystic Rose Garden, London,
1880; rep. Lahore, 1978.
 Shafâ’â, Abë ‘Abd Allah Muhammad, Islamic Jurisprudence:
Sh«ﬁ’âs Ris«la, trans. with intro. and notes by Majid
Khadduri, Baltimore, 1961.
 al-Shahrast«nâ, Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karâm, Kit«b al-Milal
wa’l-Nihal, ed. by W. Cureton, London, 1846.
 Shams al-Haqq, ‘Aun al-Ma’bëd li-Hall-i Mushkil«t Sunan
AbëD«wëd, 4 vols., Multan, 1399 A.H.
 Sharâf, M. M. (ed.), A History of Muslim Philosophy (with
Short Accounts of Other Disciplines and Modern Renaissance
in Muslim Lands), 2 vols., Wiesbaden, 1963, 1966.
 al-Sh«tibâ, Abë Ish«q Ibr«hâm b. Mës«, Al-Muw«ﬁq«t ﬁ Usël
al-Ahk«m, 4 vols., Cairo, 1341 A.H.
 

317
al-Shaukanâ, Muhammad b. ‘Alâ, Irsh«d al-Fuhël, Cairo,
1356 A.H.
 Sheikh, M. Saeed, A Dictionary of Muslim Philosophy,
Lahore, 1981.
 Shiblâ Nu’m«nâ, ‘Ilm al-Kal«m, Agra, n.d.
 ---, Al-Kal«m, Cawnpore, 1904.
 ---, Shi’r al-’Ajam, vol. III, ÿzamgarh, 1945.
 Shih«b al-Dân Suhrawardâ Maqtël, Kit«b Hikmat al-Isr«q, ed.
by Henri Corbin, Tehran, 1952.
 Siddâqâ, Dr Abu’l-Laith (ed. and annotator), Malfëz«t-i Iqb«l,
Lahore, 1977.
 Siddiqâ, Mazheruddân, Concept of Muslim Culture in Iqb«l,
Islamabad, 1970.
 Siddâq Hasan Kh«n, Muhammad, Husël al-Ma’mël min ‘Ilm
al-UÄël, Lucknow, 1298 A.H.
 Siddiq, Muhammad, Descriptive Catalogue of Allama Iqbal’s
Personal Library, Lahore, 1983.
 Smith, Norman Kemp, A Commentary to Kant’s ‘Critique of
Pure Reason’, New York, 1923.
 Spencer, Herbert, First Principles: A System of Synthetic
Philosophy, London, 1911.
 Spengler, Oswald, The Decline of the West, trans. by C. E.
Atkinson, 2 vols. in one, London, 1954.
 Sprenger, Aloys, Das Leben und die Lehre des Mohammed,
3 vols., Berlin, 1861-65.
 Steinberg, S. H. (ed.), Cassell’s Encyclopaedia of Literature,
vol. I, London, 1953.
 Stockl, Albert, Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelaters,
vol. II, Bonn, 1865.
 al-Suyëtâ, Jal«l al-Dân, Àusn al-Muhadarah ﬁ Akhb«r Misr
wa’l-Q«hirah, vol. I, Cairo, 1299 A.H.
 Tauq«n, Qadrâ H«ﬁz, Tur«th al-’Arab al-’Ilmâ, Cairo,
1382/1963.
 Thadani, Nanikram Vasanmal, The Garden of the East,
Karachi, 1932.
 

318
al-Tirmidhâ, Muhammad b. ‘¥s«, Al-J«mi’ al-Sahâh, ed. by
Ahmad Muhammad Sh«kir, 3 vols., Cairo, 1356/1937.
 Tourneau, R. Le, The Almohad Movement in North Africa in
the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries, Princeton, 1969.
 Toynbee, A., A Study of History, Vol. III, London, 1934.
 Tsanoﬀ, Radoslav A., The Problem of Immortality: Studies in
Personality and Value, London, 1924.
 al-ñësâ, Nasâr al-Dân, ‘Al-Ris«lat al-Sh«ﬁyah an al-Shakk ﬁ’l-
Khutët al-Mutaw«ziyah’ in (ñësâ’s) Ras«’il, vol. II, Hyderabad
(Deccan), 1359 A.H.
 Tyan, Emile, Institutions du droit public musulman, Tome II:
Sultanat et califat, Paris, 1956.
 Vaihinger, Hans, The Philosophy of ‘As If’, trans. by C. K.
Ogden, London, 1924.
 Wahâd-ud-Dân, Faqâr Sayyid, Rëzg«r-i Faqâr, Lahore, 1963.
 Walâ All«h, Sh«h, Àujjat All«h al-B«lighah, Vol. I, Cairo, 1322
A.H., Urdu trans. by Maul«n«’Abd al-Rahâm, Lahore, 1961.
 Whinﬁeld, E. H. (tr.), Masnavi-i Ma‘navi (Spiritual Couplets of
Maul«n« Jal«lud-Dân Muhammad Rëmâ: trans. & abridged),
London, 1898.
 Whitehead, Alfred North, The Concept of Nature, Cambridge,
1920.
 ---, Religion in the Making (Lowell Lectures in Boston in
1926), New York & Cambridge, 1926.
 ---, Science and the Modern World (Lowell Lectures in Boston
in 1925), New York, 1925.
 Wolfson, Harry Austryn, The Philosophy of the Kalam,
Cambridge, Mass., 1976.
 Yënus Farangâ Mahallâ, Muhammad, Ibn Rushd, A’zamgarh,
1324 A.H.
 Z«hid al-Kautharâ, Husn al-Taq«dâﬁ Sârat al-Im«m Abi Yësuf
al-Q«îâ, Cairo, 1948.
 al-Zarkashâ, Badr al-Dân Muhammad, b. Bah«dur, Al-Burh«n
ﬁ ‘Ulëm al-Qur’«n, ed. by Muhammad Abë ’l-Fadl al-Rahâm,
2 vols., Cairo, 1391/1972.

319
al-Ziriklâ, Khair al-Dân, Al-A’l«m: Q«mës Tar«jim li-Ashhar al-
Rij«l wa’l-Nis«’ min al’Arab wa’l-Musta’ribân wa’l-
Mustashriqân, 10 vols. in 5, Cairo, 1373-78/1954-59; rev.
edn., 8 vols., Beirut, 1979.

(B) Articles
 Arendonk, C. van, ‘Ibn Hazm’, The Encyclopaedia of Islam
(First edition), II, 384-86.
 Arnaldez, Roger, & A. Z. Iskander, ‘Ibn Rushd’, Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, XII, 1-9.
 Arnheim, R., ‘Gestalt’, Encyclopedia of Psychology, II, 58-60.
 Barker, Henry, ‘Berkeley’, section: ‘Metaphysics of
Immaterialism’, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, II,
526b-528b.
 Bassett, R., ‘Ibn Tumart’, The Encyclopaedia of Islam, II, 425-
27; also Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam, pp. 152-54.
 Bausani, A., ‘Concept of Time in the Religious Philosophy of
Muhammad Iqb«l’, Die Welt des Islams, N. S., III (1954), 158-
86.
 Beare, Mary, ‘Faust’ in S. H. Steinberg (ed.), Cassell’s
Encyclopaedia of LiteratureCassell’s Encyclopaedia of
Literature 19.
 de Boer, T. J., ‘Atomic Theory (Muhammadan)’,
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, II, 202b-203b.
 Bohr, Niels, ‘Atom’, Encyclopaedia Britannica, II, 642-47.
 Broad, C. D., ‘Time’ Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,
XII, 334a-345a.
 Browne, E. G., ‘Pan– Islamism’ in F. Kirkpatrick (ed.),
Lectures on the History of the Nineteenth Century.
 Bü tler, R. A., ‘Kit«b al-Taw«sân of al-Àall«j, Journal of the
University of Baluchistan, 1/2 (Autumn 1981), 49-117.
 Carr, H. Wildon, ‘The Idealistic Interpretation of Einstein’s
Theory’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, N. S., XXII
(1921-22), 123-27.
 Carra de Vaux, B., ‘Averroes, Averroism’, Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics, II, 264-66; ‘Ibn Rushd,’ The

320
Encyclopaedia of Islam, II, 410-13.
 D«r, Bashâr Ahmad, ‘Iqbal Aur Mas’alah-i Zam«n-o-Mak«n,’
in Salim Akhtar (ed.) Fikr-iIqb«l ke Munawwar Goshay
(Lahore, 1977), pp. 141-51.
 Deussen, Paul, ‘Atman’, Encyclopaedia of Religion and
Ethics, II, 195b-197b.
 Diwald, Susanna, ‘Kit«b al-Qist«s al-Mustaqâm’, Der Islam,
XXXVI (1961), 171-74.
 Dray, W. H., ‘Spengler, Oswald’, The Encyclopaedia of
Philosophy, VII, 527-30.
 Dummet, Michael, ‘A Defence of McTaggart’s Proof of the
Unreality of Time’, Philosophical Review, LXIX ( 1960), 497-
504.

Ehsan Elahie, Rana M. N., ‘Iqbal on the Freedom of Ijtih«d,’
Oriental College Magazine (Allama Iqbal Centenary
Number), LIII (1977), 295-330. Contains facsimiles of Allama
Iqbal’s recently discovered four letters  to Professor Maulavi
Muhammad Shafâ’ from 13 March 1924 to 1 May 1924.

Emmet, Dorothy M., ‘Alexander, Samuel’, The Encyclopaedia
of Philosophy, I, 69-73.

Forster, E. M., ‘The Secrets of the Self (Asr«r-i-Khudi)’, The
Athenaeum (10 December 1920), pp. 803-04; a book review
reproduced in Dr Riﬀat Hasan (ed.), The Sword and the
Sceptre, pp. 277-85.

Frank, Philipp, ‘Philosophical Interpretations and
Misinterpretations of the Theory of Relativity’,  in Herbert
Feigel & May Brodbeck (ed.), Readings in the Philosophy of
Science, pp. 212-31.

Gilman, Richard C., ‘Hocking, William Ernest’, Encyclopaedia
of Philosophy, IV, 46-47.
 

321
Goldziher, Ignaz, ‘D«wëd B. ‘Alâ B. Khalf’, Encyclopaedia of
Religion and EthicsEncyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 06
‘Ibn Hazm’, ibid., VII, 70-72.
 ---, ‘Materialien zur Kenntniss der Almohadenbewegung’,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen morgenlä ndischen Gesellschaft,
XLI (1887), 30-140.
 Haldane, J.S., ‘Are Physical, Biological and Psychological
Categories Irreducible?’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, XVIII (1917-18), 419-36.
 Halperin, D.J., ‘The Ibn Sayya`d Traditions and the Legend of
al-Dajj«l,’ Journal of the American Oriental Society, XCII/ii
(1976), 213-25.

Hanney, A. Howard (ed.), ‘Abstract of the Minutes of the
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society for the Fifty-Fourth
Session,’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, N.S., XXIII
(1932-33), 341-43 (contains a brief report  about Allama
Iqbal’s lecture: ‘Is Religion Possible?’ on 5 December 1932).

Haque, Serajul, ‘Ibn Taimiyya’s Conception of Analogy and
Consensus’, Islamic Culture, XVII (1943), 77-87; ‘Ibn
Taimiyyah’ in M. M. Sharif (ed.), A History of Muslim
Philosophy, II, 796-819.

H«shimâ, Rafâ’al-Dân, ‘All«mah ke Chand Ghair-Mudawwan
KhuÇëÇ’, Iqbal Review, XXIII/iv (Jan. 1983), 41-59
(reproduces Allama Iqbal’s letter dated 6 May 1937
addressed to Professor Dr Syed Zafarul Hasan, which
indicates that Allama had gathered ‘material’  for his
proposed Rhodes Memorial Lectures on ‘Space and Time in
Muslim Thought’).

Haydar Ali Dirioz, ‘Tevﬁk Fikret’, Journal of the Regional
Cultural Institute, I/4 (Autumn  1968), 12-15.
 Haynie, H. A., ‘Helmholtz, Hermann von’, Encyclopedia of
Psychology, II, 103.

322
 Heisenberg, W., ‘Ü ber den anschaulischen Inhalt der
quanten theoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik’, Zeitschrift
fü r Physik, XLIII (1927), 172-98.
 Hopkins, J. F. P., ‘Ibn Tumart’, The Encyclopaedia of Islam
(New edition), III, 958-60.
 Hourani, G. F., ‘The Dialogue Between Al-Ghazz«li and the
Philosophers on the Origin of the World’, The Muslim World,
XLVIII/iii and iv (1958), 183-91, 308-14.

Hussain, Riaz, ‘1910 men Dunya-i Isl«m ke H«l«t (‘Political
Conditions of the Islamic World in 1910)’, Iqbal Review,
XIX/2 (July 1978), 85-90 (focussed on Allama Iqbal’s letter
dated 22 August 1910 addressed to the Editor, Paisa Akhb«r
- an Urdu daily of Lahore).

Imtiy«z ‘Alâ Kh«n ‘Arshâ, M., ‘Zam«n-o Mak«n kâ Bahth ke
Muta’allaq ‘All«mah Iqb«l ka aik Ma’akhadh: ‘Ir«qâya
Ashnawâ’, Iqbal Centenary Papers Presented at the
International Congress on Allama Mohammad IqbalCongress
on Allama Mohammad Iqbal 10.

Jacobi, Hermann, ‘Atomic Theory (Indian)’, Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics, II, 199a202b.
 Kazim, M. A., ‘Al-Bârënâ and Trignometry’, Al-Bârënâ
Commemoration VolumeAl-Bârënâ Commemoration Volume
70.
 Kennedy, E. S., ‘Al-Bârënâ Abë Raih«n’, Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, II, 147-68 (bases al-Bârënâ’s ‘theory of
function’ on his ‘Treatise on Shadows’).
 Koﬀka, K., ‘Gestalt’, Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences,
VI, 642-46.

Koﬂer, Hans, ‘Handbuch des islamischen Staats und
Verwaltungsrechtes von Badr-ad-Din ibn Gama’ah.
Herausgegeben, abersetzt und mit Anmerkungen versehen’,
Islamics VI (1934), 349-414, VII (1935), 1-64 and Schlü

323
ssheft (1938), 18-129 (Arabic text with  German trans. of Ibn
Jam«’ah’s Tahrâr al-Ahk«m ﬁ Tadbâr Ahl al-Isl«m).

Kroll, Wilhelm, ‘Atomic Theory (Greek)’, Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics, II, 197a99a.
 Laoust, H, ‘Ibn Taimâyya’, The Encyclopaedia of Islam (New
edition), III, 951-55.
 McCarthy, R. J., ‘Al-Bakill«nâ,’ The Encyclopaedia of Islam
(New edition), I, 958-59.

Macdonald, D.B., ‘Continuous Re-creation and Atomic Time
in Moslem Scholastic Theology’, Isis, IX (1927), 326-44;
reprinted in The Moslem World, XVIII/i (Jan. 1928), 6-28. 
---, ‘Ijtih«d,’ The Encyclopaedia of Islam, II, 448-49;
reproduced in the New edition, III, 1026-27.

McTaggert, J. M. E., ‘The Unreality of Time’, MindMind 74.
 Margoliouth, D. S., ‘Al-Mahdâ’, Shorter Encyclopaedia of
Islam, pp. 310-13.
 Marmura, Michael E., ‘Ghaz«lâ’s Attitude to the Secular
Sciences and Logic’, in George F. Hourani (ed.), Essays on
Islamic Philosophy and Science, pp. 100-11.
 ---, ‘Soul: Islamic Concepts’, The Encyclopedia of Religion,
XIII, 460-65.
 Mas‘ëd, Kh«lid, ‘Khutub«ti Iqb«l men Ijtih«d ki Ta’rif: Ijtih«d
k« T«râkhâ Pas-i Manzar,’ Fikr-o-Nazar, XV/vii-viii,
(Islamabad, Jan., Feb. 1978), 31-53.

Namus, Dr M. S., ‘Ibn al-Haitham: The Greatest Physicist of
Islam’, in Hakim Mohammad Said (ed.), Ibn Haitham:
Proceedings of the Celebrations of 1000th Anniversary (1-10
Nov. 1969, Karachi), pp. 124-34.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, ‘Shih«b al-Dân Suhrawardâ Maqtël’ in
M. M. Sharif (ed.), A History of Muslim Philosophy, I, 372-98.
 

324
---, ‘Al-ñësâ Nasâr al-Dân’, Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography,
XIII, 508-14 (also gives an assessment of al-Tu`si`’s work on
parallel postulate).
 Nunn, T. Percy, ‘The Idealistic Interpretation of Einstein’s
Theory’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, New Series,
XXII (1921-22), 127-30.
 Obermann, J., ‘Political Theology in Early Islam, Hasan al-
Basri’s Treatise on Qadar’, Journal of the American Oriental
Society, LV (1935), 138-62.
 Peyser, C. S., ‘Kohler, Wolfgang (1887-1967),’ Encyclopedia
of Psychology, II, 271.
 Planck, Wilhelm, ‘Reformation’, An Encyclopedia of
ReligionAn Encyclopedia of Religion 42.
 Poynting, J. Henry, ‘Atomic Theory (Medieval and Modern)’,
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, II, 203b-210b.
 Plessner, M., ‘Al-J«hiz’, Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, VII,
63-65 (focusses on Kit«b alHayaw«n).
 Qureshi, I. H., ‘Historiography’, in M. M. Sharif (ed.), A
History of Muslim Philosophy, II, 1195-1219.

Reyburn, ‘Idealism and the Reality of Time’, Mind, October
1913, pp. 493-508. Reichenbach, Hans, ‘The Philosophical
Signiﬁcance of the Theory of Relativity’, in H. Feigel & M.
Brodbeck (eds.), Readings in the Philosophy of Science, pp.
195-211; also in P. A. Schilpp (ed.), Albert Einstein:
Philosopher-Scientist, pp. 287-311.

Russell, Bertrand, ‘Relativity, Philosophical Consequences’,
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1953), XIX, 98d-100a.
 Sabra, A. I., ‘Ibn al-Haytham’, Dictionary of Scientiﬁc
Biography, VI, 189-210. (Also gives an exhaustive
bibliography including up-to-date  information about MSS of
Kit«b al-Man«zir).
 Schimmel, A., ‘Some Thoughts About the Future Study of
Iqbal’, Iqbal (Iqbal Number), XXIV/4 (October 1977), 1-8.
 

325
Sharif, M. M., ‘Inﬂuence of Muslim Thought on the West’,
Section D: ‘Philosophical Inﬂuence from Descartes to Kant’,
idem (ed.), A History of Muslim Philosophy, II, 1381-87.
 Sheikh, M. Saeed, ‘Allama Iqbal’s Interest in the Sciences’
(Iqbal Memorial Lecture, University of the Punjab, Lahore,
1988), Iqbal Review, XXX/i (April-June 1989), 31-43.
 ---, ‘Al-Ghazali: Metaphysics’, section D: ‘Attack on the
Philosophers’, in M. M. Sharif (ed.) A History of Muslim
Philosophy, I, 592-616.
 ---, ‘Al-Ghazali: Mysticism’, ibid., I, 617-24.
 ---, ‘Philosophy of Man’ (General Presidential Address,
Pakistan Philosophical Congress, 1987), Iqbal Review, XXIX/i;
(April-June, 1988), 3-16.
 Siddiqi, Dr M. Razi-ud-Din, ‘Iqbal’s Conception of Time and
Space’, Iqbal As A Thinker, pp. 1-40.
 ---, ‘Mathematics and Astronomy’, in M. M. Sharif (ed.), A
History of Muslim Philosophy, II, 1277-92.
 Smuts, J. C., ‘Holism’, Encyclopaedia Britannica, XI, 640c-
644a.
 Stern, S. M., ‘Ibn al-Samh’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, 1956, pp. 31-44.
 Syrier, Miya, ‘Ibn Khaldun and Mysticism’, Islamic Culture,
XXI/ii, (1947), 264-302.
 Taylor, Alfred Edward, ‘Continuity’, Encyclopaedia of Religion
and Ethics, IV, 89b-98a (inter alia Zeno of Elia’s notion, 91-
92 and Cantor’s theory, 96b-98a).
 Thomson, W., ‘Kharijitism and the Kharijites’ in R. W.
Barstrow (ed.), The Macdonald Presentation Volume, pp.
371-89.
 Vernet, Juan, ‘Mathematics, Astronomy, Optics’, in J. Schacht
(ed.), The Legacy of Islam, pp. 461-89.

Watt, W. Montgomery, ‘The Political Attitudes of the
Mu’tazilah’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1962, pp.
38-54. 
Yazd«ni, Dr Khw«jah Hamâd, ‘Ris«lah dar Zam«n-o-Mak«n’,

326
Al-M«‘arif, XVII/7 (Lahore, July 1984), 31-42, 56 (Urdu trans.
of Khwaja Muhammad P«rs«’s tractate on space and time
based on the unique MS 707, M«j«mâ’ Tal’at, D«r al-Kutub,
Cairo).

Zedler, B. H., ‘Averroes and Immortality’, New Scholasticism,
1954, pp. 436-53.
 

