2
               Bloom’s   Modern      Critical      Interpretations
The Adventures of        The Grapes of Wrath Portnoy’s   Complaint
  Huckleberry Finn Great        Expectations A        Portrait of the Artist 
The Age of Innocence The  Great Gatsby            as a Young Man
Alice’s Adventures in    Gulliver’s Travels           Pride and Prejudice
  Wonderland                The Handmaid’s Tale Ragtime
All Quiet on the             Heart of Darkness The        Red Badge of 
  Western Front             I Know Why the               Courage
As You Like It                  Caged Bird Sings The       Rime of the 
The Ballad of the Sad   The Iliad                           Ancient Mariner
  Café                            Jane Eyre                      The Rubáiyát of Omar 
Beowulf                         The Joy Luck Club          Khayyám
Black Boy                      The Jungle                    The Scarlet Letter
The Bluest Eye             Lord of the Flies             Silas Marner
The Canterbury Tales The  Lord of the Rings Song   of Solomon
Cat on a Hot Tin           Love in the Time of        The Sound and the 
  Roof                              Cholera                          Fury
The Catcher in the        The Man Without           The Stranger
  Rye                               Qualities                      A  Streetcar Named 
Catch-22                       The Metamorphosis Desire
The Chronicles of         Miss Lonelyhearts Sula
  Narnia                         Moby-Dick                     The Tale of Genji
The Color Purple          My  Ántonia                    A Tale of Two Cities
Crime and                     Native Son                     The Tempest
  Punishment                 Night                             Their Eyes Were 
The Crucible                 1984                                 Watching God
Darkness at Noon The        Odyssey                  Things Fall Apart
Death of a Salesman Oedipus   Rex                  To Kill  a Mockingbird
The Death of Artemio   The Old Man and the     Ulysses
  Cruz                              Sea                              Waiting for Godot
Don Quixote                  On the Road                 The Waste Land
Emerson’s Essays        One Flew Over the        White Noise
Emma                             Cuckoo’s Nest             Wuthering Heights
Fahrenheit 451             One Hundred Years of   Young Goodman 
A Farewell to Arms Solitude                                  Brown
Frankenstein                 Persuasion

4
Bloom’s Modern Critical Interpretations
            William   Shakespeare’s
           Romeo    and    Juliet
                    New Edition




       Edited and with an introduction by
                  Harold  Bloom
      Sterling Professor of the Humanities
                    Yale University

5
Bloom’s Modern Critical   Interpretations: 
William   Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet—New  Edition

Copyright ©2009  by Infobase Publishing

Introduction ©2009  by Harold Bloom

All  rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any 
information storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
For more information contact:

Bloom’s Literary Criticism
An imprint  of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001

Library  of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication    Data 

William  Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet / edited and with an introduction by Harold 
Bloom. — New ed.
       p. cm. — (Bloom’s modern critical interpretations)
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
   ISBN  978-1-60413-633-3 (alk. paper)
1. Shakespeare, William, 1564–1616. Romeo and Juliet.  I. Bloom, Harold.  II. Title: 
Romeo and Juliet.

PR2831.W552 2009
822.3'3—dc22                                         2009009817

Bloom’s Literary Criticism books are available at special discounts when purchased in 
bulk quantities for businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call 
our Special Sales Department in New York at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.

You can find Bloom’s Literary Criticism on the World  Wide Web at  
http://www.chelseahouse.com.

Cover design by Alicia Post

Printed in the United  States of America
MP BCL  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

This book is printed on acid-free paper.

All  links and Web addresses were checked and verified to be correct at the time of 
publication. Because of the dynamic nature of the Web, some addresses and links may 
have changed since publication and may no longer be valid.  

6
                                                Contents






Editor’s Note              vii

Introduction              1
        Harold Bloom

On Shakespeare’s Informal Language            5
        Norman F. Blake

“A Thing  Like  Death”:  Sleeping Potions and Poisons 
        in  Romeo and Juliet and Antony and Cleopatra            29
        Tanya Pollard

Shakespeare and Catholicism:  
        The  Franciscan Connection             55
        David  Salter

Romeo’s “Death-markt”  Imagination  
        and Its  Tragic Consequences          79
        William  M.  McKim

Wherefore Art  Thou  Tereu?  
        Juliet and the Legacy of  Rape             91
        Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

“Bodied Forth”:  Spectator, Stage,  
        and Actor  in the  Early Modern  Theater              121
        Jennifer A. Low

7
vi                                                 Contents

Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”:  
        Romeo, the  Apothecary,  
        and the  Performance of Memory              147
        Lina  Perkins Wilder

“Wouldst  thou withdraw  love’s faithful  vow?”: 
        The  Negotiation  of Love in  
        the  Orchard Scene (Romeo and Juliet Act II)            169
        Thomas Honegger

Motion  and Mercutio  in  Romeo and Juliet           185
        Daryl  W. Palmer

Chronology              199

Contributors              201

Bibliography              203

Acknowledgments              207

Index             209

8
                                           Editor’s       Note







My introduction  briefly analyzes the drama’s four crucial personages: Juliet, 

       “ Mercutio, the nurse, and Romeo.
         Informal  language” in the play is  Norman F. Blake’s concern, while 
Tanya Pollard contrasts potions and poisons in Romeo and Juliet and the later, 
more vital tragedy, Antony and Cleopatra.
       David  Salter shrewdly details Shakespearean friars, remarking their pa-
gan quality, after which William  M.  McKim  charts the imaginative differ-
ence between Romeo and Juliet.
       Images of rape invoked throughout the tragedy are noted by Robert N. 
Watson and Stephen Dickey, while Jennifer A. Low considers the dialectic of 
audience and actors in Shakespearean theater.
       Memory  is the focus of Lina Perkins Wilder, after which the intricacies 
of the orchard scene are expounded by Thomas Honneger.
       This volume concludes with Daryl W. Palmer’s Platonic account of the 
philosophy of motion as embodied in the mercurial Mercutio.















                                                        vii

10
                                     HAROLD         BLOOM


                                            Introduction




               William        Shakespeare’s       Romeo   and   Juliet

Harold  C. Goddard,  in  his  The Meaning of Shakespeare (1951), remarked 
upon how much of Shakespeare turns upon the vexed relationships between 
generations of the  same family,  which  was also  one of  the  burdens of 
Athenian tragedy. Except for the  early Titus Andronicus, which I judge to 
have been a charnel-house parody of  Christopher  Marlowe,  Romeo and 
Juliet was Shakespeare’s first venture at composing a tragedy, and also his 
first deep investigation of generational perplexities. The Montague-Capulet 
hatred might seem overwrought enough to have its parodistic aspects, but it 
destroys two immensely valuable, very young lovers, Juliet of the Capulets 
and Romeo of the Montagues, and Mercutio as well, a far more interesting 
character than Romeo. Yet Romeo, exalted by the authentic love between 
the even more vital Juliet and himself,  is one of the  first  instances of the 
Shakespearean representation of crucial change in   a character  through 
self-overhearing and self-ref lection. Juliet, an even larger instance, is the 
play’s triumph, since she inaugurates Shakespeare’s extraordinary procession 
of vibrant, life-enhancing  women, never matched before or since in all of 
Western literature,  including  in  Chaucer, who  was Shakespeare’s truest 
precursor as the creator of personalities.
       Juliet, Mercutio, the nurse, and to a lesser extent Romeo are among the 
first Shakespearean characters who manifest their author’s uncanny genius 
at inventing persons. Richard III, like Aaron the Moor  in Titus Andronicus, 
is a  brilliant   Marlovian  cartoon  or  grotesque, but lacks all  inwardness, 
which is true also of the figures in the earliest comedies. Faulconbridge the 
Bastard in King John and Richard II were Shakespeare’s initial breakthroughs 
in the forging  of personalities, before the composition of Romeo and Juliet. 

                                                         1

11
2                                              Harold Bloom

After  Juliet, Mercutio,  and the  nurse came Bottom, Shylock, Portia, and 
most overwhelmingly Falstaff,  with  whom  at  last Shakespeare was fully 
himself. Harold Goddard shrewdly points out that the nurse, who lacks wit, 
imagination, and above all love, even for Juliet, is no Falstaff, who abounds 
in cognitive power, creative humor, and (alas) love for the undeserving Hal. 
The nurse is ferociously lively and funny, but she proves to be exactly what the 
supremely accurate Juliet eventually calls her: “most wicked fiend,” whose care 
for Juliet has no inward reality. In some sense, the agent of Juliet’s tragedy is 
the nurse, whose failure in loving the child she has raised leads Juliet to the 
desperate expedient that destroys both Romeo and herself.
       Mercutio,  a superb and delightful  role, nevertheless is inwardly quite 
as cold as the nurse. Though he is Shakespeare’s first sketch of a charismatic 
individual  (Berowne in  Love’s Labor’s Lost has brilliant language, but no 
charisma), Mercutio is  a dangerous companion for Romeo, and  becomes 
redundant as soon as Romeo passes from sexual infatuation to sincere love, 
from Rosaline  to Juliet.  Age-old  directorial  wisdom is  that  Shakespeare 
killed off  Mercutio so quickly, because Romeo is a mere stick in contrast to 
his exuberant friend. But Mercutio becomes irrelevant once Juliet and Romeo 
fall profoundly  in love with  one another. What  place has Mercutio in the 
play once it becomes dominated by Juliet’s magnificent avowal of her love’s 
infinitude:

       And  yet I wish but for the thing  I have.
       My  bounty is as boundless as the sea,
       My  love as deep; the more I give to thee,
       The  more I have, for both are infinite.

Contrast that with Mercutio  at his usual bawdry:

       If  love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
       Now  will  he sit under a medlar tree,
       And  wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
       As  maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
       O,  Romeo, that she were, O that she were
       An  open-arse, thou a poperin pear!

Since Juliet develops from strength to strength, Romeo (who is only partly a 
convert to love) is inevitably dwarfed by her. Partly this is the consequence of 
what will be Shakespeare’s long career of comparing women to men to men’s 
accurate disadvantage, a career that can be said to commence with precisely 
this play. But  partly the  tragic flaw  is  in Romeo himself,  who yields too 
readily to many fierce emotions: anger, fear, grief, and despair. This yielding 

12
                                                 Introduction                                              3

leads to the death of Tybalt,  to Romeo’s own suicide, and to Juliet’s own 
farewell to life.  Shakespeare is careful to make Romeo just as culpable, in 
his way, as Mercutio or Tybalt. Juliet, in total contrast, remains radically free 
of flaw: she is a saint of love, courageous and trusting, refusing the nurse’s 
evil counsel and attempting to hold on to love’s truth, which she incarnates. 
Though it  is “The  Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet,” the  lovers are tragic in 
wholly different ways. Juliet, in a curious prophecy of Hamlet’s charismatic 
elevation, transcends her self-destruction and dies exalted. Romeo, not of 
her eminence, dies more pathetically. We are moved by both  deaths, but 
Shakespeare sees to it that our larger loss is the loss of Juliet.

14
                                  NORMAN         F.   BLAKE


                 On   Shakespeare’s      Informal        Language*







                                            1.  Introduction
When      asked to compile a dictionary of Shakespeare’s informal English 
within  a series published by Athlone Press (now taken over by Continuum 
Books), I naturally reviewed what the attraction of compiling such a diction-
ary might be. Informal language is a neglected topic—at least from a historical 
standpoint—and it  is not  well  covered in historical  dictionaries like  the 
Oxford English Dictionary [OED] if only because, to illustrate why a word or 
phrase may be understood as informal, a much longer context is necessary 
than most dictionaries provide. There are dictionaries and glossaries devoted 
to other aspects of Shakespeare’s language like legal and military language, 
sexual innuendo, and neologisms, but his informal language has not been 
covered though it forms so large a part of conversation. As Shakespeare is 
primarily a dramatist and he is one of the  first dramatists to use informal 
language for conversation, his informal English should be a major topic of 
investigation. Indeed, his informal language is often ignored by editors and 
commentators, who often interpret what could be informal as formal and/or 

( grammatical. I have had an interest in informal  language for some time 
 Blake 1981), and through compiling this  dictionary I  hope to learn more 
about Shakespeare, conversational language in the Elizabethan and Jaco-
bean periods, and to what extent we may need to change our views about 
Shakespeare through studying this aspect of his linguistic usage. However, 

Journal of Historical Pragmatics, Volume 3, Number 2 (2002): pp. 179–204. Copyright © 2002 
John Benjamin Publishing Company.

                                                         5

15
6                                            Norman F. Blake

although all  dictionaries  have fuzzy boundaries, topic-based dictionaries 
are especially problematic because the boundaries of any given topic are less 
clearly defined than what constitutes the standard forms of a language.

       2.  The  data for a dictionary of Shakespeare’s informal English
Shakespeare wrote both poems and plays. It is in the plays, which are con-
versation based, that one expects to find  examples of informal language, 
because the poems are rhetorical and elevated in their language, dealing as 
they do with love, and in the longer poems this passion is set in a distant past 
and treated in an almost epic manner. Although they may contain dialogue, 
that dialogue is likely to be idealised. Some of the dialogue in the poems is 
inspired by hate, revenge, fear and other emotions which could readily give 
rise to less formality in  speech. Shakespeare may deliberately set the tone 
of this language in direct contrast with that which is both more formal and 
elegant. The lover in the Sonnets 1 can exclaim But out alack, he was but one 
hour mine (33.11), where out and alack are examples of informal language 
with parallels in the plays. When in Venus and Adonis Adonis’s stallion sees 
a mare, he cares little for what his master shouts:

       (1)  What recketh he his riders angrie sturre,
             His  flattering holla, or his stand, I say, (283–284). 

Here, holla, stand, and I say are all examples of informal  language—that 
language which a rider addresses to his horse or which people use to others 
whom they are trying to command or restrain. There is no reason to exclude 
poems from the data-base; and it may be that there are interesting parallels 
between the poems and some of the plays.
       These caveats lead naturally to a consideration of the canon of Shake-
speare’s work. There are two problems here, especially regarding the plays: 
they may exist in different formats and they may also have been written by 
more than one author. The plays attributed  to  Shakespeare in the period 
c.1582–1608 survive in various copies: (i) the  so-called “bad” and “good” 
quartos [Q], most of which are dated before 1623, (ii) the First Folio [F], the 
first collected edition of Shakespeare’s plays issued by Heminge and Condell 
in 1623, and (iii) the Second (1632), Third (1663–1664) and Fourth (1685) 
Folios, which are revised versions of the earlier editions, some of which may 
have had access to a better text. Although editors of Shakespeare’s plays take 
account of these later folios to support emendations, they contain few genu-
ine readings because their editors were influenced by the wish to make the 
text intelligible. I do take account of cases where they differ significantly from 
F, because this could indicate informal English where their editors found F 
difficult to understand.

16
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                      7

       A  lexicographer should work from the original editions. But here there 
is a problem arising from the need to fit a dictionary into a publisher’s pro-
gramme. Most publishers want to tie their dictionaries to a modern edition 
because they assume that a modern edition is authoritative and widely known 
among students and others, and because they assume sales will be better if 
their dictionaries are tied to a complete edition of Shakespeare’s works which 
is commonly chosen by teachers at institutions of education as their set text 
for students, such as the Oxford collected edition (Wells and Taylor 1988). 
The problem is that any scholarly work which uses one of these editions for 
its data will both  omit much of  what might be Shakespeare’s language and 
become outmoded in the not-too-distant  future as a new collected edition 
becomes accepted. Thus Spevack’s thesaurus (1993), which is based on the 
Riverside Shakespeare, omits many words which occur in less favoured texts, 
especially the bad quartos. It is difficult  to  accept that it  encapsulates the 
whole of Shakespeare’s world vision and intellectual framework (which is its 
aim), as it fails to evaluate the whole of his potential vocabulary. Quite apart 
from the  bad quartos, there are different versions of the same play as for 
example Hamlet and King Lear. With King Lear older editors often amalgam-
ated Q2 and F to form a conflated modern edition. Nowadays, it is thought 
that Shakespeare revised the text so that there are two equally valid and au-
thoritative versions of the  same play. With Hamlet some editors prefer to 
follow F and others Q2, whereas some try to amalgamate the two. Even with 
those editions which amalgamate the two texts into a single version, the result 
is that only additional, and not variant, lines are included in the final edition. 
Where there are variant lines, the editor has to choose between them, for he 
or she cannot include them both.
       Many  of the plays also show evidence of the hands of different authors, 
for co-operation in the pressurised life of the theatre may have demanded it. 
When a play is announced, it has to be made ready for the first performance. 
It is likely that several authors were put to work to get the play ready in time. 
When a play went into rehearsal, it might have been adapted, as Philip Gas-
kell (1978:245–262) has shown for the modern theatre, and if the principal 
author was not available another dramatist might have stepped in to pro-
vide revised scenes or lines. The manuscript play of Sir Thomas More contains 
six hands as well as annotations by the Master of the Revels. It is probable 
that the main part of the  play was written by Anthony Munday in  associa-
tion with Thomas Chettle and possibly one further author. The Master of the 
Revels demanded alterations to the first draft  and this is  one reason why 
additional hands are found in the manuscript. Some alterations are Shake-
speare’s, identified as Hand D in the manuscript. This hand wrote a whole 
scene (164 lines in Wells and Taylor 1988). In addition, twenty-one lines of 
a soliloquy by More, in  the hand of a professional scribe, are attributed to 

17
8                                            Norman F. Blake

Shakespeare. Quite apart from this play, other plays in the Shakespeare canon 
show signs of joint composition, often with Thomas Middleton. When a play 
was finished in draft, a fair copy was made to be used as a prompt copy and 
another copy may have been in the company’s archives for future use. When 
the company travelled, to escape the plague or creditors, they may have taken 
a smaller number of actors on tour to keep their  costs down and then the 
plays in the repertoire would have been adapted to suit a reduced company. 
So different versions of the same play may exist, all of which are authoritative 
to a greater or lesser extent, though Shakespeare may not have been the au-
thor of the complete text of these versions. The problem is deciding precisely 
how much was his—or even if this is something worth  trying  to establish. 
By “Shakespeare’s English” one has to accept anything in the canon of works 
attributed to Shakespeare in all their versions up to and including F with the 
addition of some plays attributed to him which do not  appear in F, such as 
Pericles and Two Noble Kinsmen.
       This decision is significant for a dictionary which records Shakespeare’s 
informal language. Although  some informal language may be particularly 
Shakespearian, such as the malapropisms used by Dogberry or the idiomatic 
phrases used by Mrs Quickly, informal  language by its nature is likely  to 
reflect the colloquialisms and the lower linguistic registers characteristic of 
its period. The bad quartos may be memorial re-constructions by an actor. 
Each actor would remember his own part or parts, but other parts could be 
reproduced in a less authentic form. This could affect examples of informal 
language, for there is little reason to suppose that this actor would necessarily 
remember the informal utterances exactly as in the prompt copy. For example, 
discourse markers express the speaker’s emotional response to the situation 
he or she is involved in, but many such discourse markers are freely inter-
changeable—and this is as true today as it was in Shakespeare’s time. When 
performing the plays actors might vary the discourse markers or idiomatic 
expressions without thinking twice about such variation. A discourse mark-
er like “why” could be readily inserted or omitted depending on how much 
emphasis the actor wanted to put on the following utterance (Blake 1992). 
Where a character is identified with a particular turn of phrase, as is Nym in 
the Henry plays and Merry Wives with that is the humour of it, it is likely that 
examples of this phrase were added or deleted by the actor playing this role in 
different places in the text and in different performances. This facility to alter 
examples of informal English which cannot be detected so easily today may 
have been freely exercised, and we are unable to tell what actually started out 
as Shakespeare’s own informal English. That is the nature of informal En- 
glish. In this area of language we can do little more than use Shakespeare as a 
token of the informal language used at his time without claiming that all ex-
amples of informal language actually came from his pen. A dictionary dealing 

18
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                      9

with this topic will  be a snapshot of informal language of the time in which 
Shakespeare lived, who would in any case be recording what was commonly 
heard at the time rather than necessarily trying to invent new examples of 
informal language, as he might have done with some specialised example of 
literary or elevated language. Yet, even with new words, older claims that he 
introduced so many new ones into the language have been modified by recent 
scholarship (Schäfer 1980).

                    3.  Different  varieties of  Early Modern  English
To talk about informal English  presupposes that there is a formal language 
against which it is compared, and this naturally assumes that people at the 
time also understood that there  were variations in speech which acted as 
markers of social status or of a different environment in which the speech is 
found. There is no problem with this  concept, for Shakespeare often high-
lights differences in language. Prince Hal refers to the language of drawers 
and tapsters in this way:

       (2)  They take it  already vpon their confidence that  though I  be 
             but Prince of Wales, yet I am the King of Curtesie: telling me 
             flatly  I am no proud Iack like Falstaffe, but a Corinthian, a lad 
             of mettle, a good boy,                                   (1H4 2.5.8–12).2

Similarly, Hotspur rebukes his wife for using oaths which are not appropri-
ate to her status:

       (3)  Not yours, in good sooth?
             You sweare like a Comfit-makers Wife:
             Not  you, in good sooth; and, as true as I liue;
             And,  as God shall mend me; and, as sure as day: 
                                                                              (1H4 3.1.243–246).

We might,  in  reference to quotation  (3), have assumed that all  oaths or 
asseverations were informal, though we might not so readily accept that ones 
like in good sooth were associated with artisans’ wives, i.e. with both a gender 
and a class association. In fact, in Shakespeare’s other plays in good sooth is 

( used by Trinculo in The Tempest (2.2.146), by Lucio in Measure for Measure 
 3.1.366), and as Good sooth, by Pericles in Pericles (sc.1.129). Although 
Trinculo is a lower-class male and Lucio an affected man about town with 
effeminate attitudes, Pericles is an older man of heroic character. Hotspur’s 
assessment of these oaths does not tally with their use in other plays. Of the 
examples in quotation (2), proud Iack, Corinthian, a lad of mettle and a good 
boy, only the last one occurs elsewhere in Shakespeare and there it appears to 

19
10                                          Norman F. Blake

have no overtones, for it is used by Mrs Page to compliment the young lad, 
Robin, for keeping details of her plot secret (MW 3.3.29). Mrs Page would 
hardly use the language of tapsters, and presumably it is only in certain con-
texts that this phrase took on a specialised meaning.
       At  the  upper end of the language hierarchy Shakespeare’s contempo-
raries undoubtedly understood that many speakers tried hard to make their 
language elegant and fashionable. Mercutio expresses it this way:

       (4)  The Pox of such antique lisping affecting phantacies, these new 
             tuners of accent: Iesu a very good blade, a very tall man, a very 
             good whore. Why  is  not this  a lamentable thing Grandsire, 
             that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies: these 
             fashion Mongers, these pardon-mee’s, who stand so much on 
             the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on ( the old bench.
                                                                                       RJ 2.3.26–33)

Modern  affectations are contrasted with  old-fashioned values, which are 
neglected by such fashionable people. There is no doubt people accepted that 
the English of this time contained different levels of language, for although 
language at all times is stratified, this is not always readily recognised by the 
speakers of that language.
       The difficulty  with  tracing  informal language from the  past is that it 
does not necessarily consist of a specialised vocabulary in the same way that 
technical or Latinate words do. The words which make up informal English 
are likely, for the most part, to be ordinary words which have been given a 
particular connotation or have been drained of their normal semantic mean-
ing. They do not  confine themselves to a particular subject, like technical 
vocabularies. Equally, one does not expect foreign words to be borrowed for 
the purpose of creating informal language, though this can happen with wit-
ticisms and educated playing with words—and such forms might eventually 
become informal. In quotation (2) Prince Hal implies that proud Iack, Corin-
thian, a lad of mettle and a good boy are examples of the language of tapsters. 
The word Corinthian, although ultimately a foreign loan from Greek possibly 
through Latin,  was not borrowed into English to  mean ‘one of the boys, a 
good fellow’ OED “Corinthian  B” sb. records the word in the sense ‘A native 
or inhabitant of Corinth’  from the early sixteenth century. Towards the end 
of that  century the sense ‘a shameless or a “brazen-faced” fellow’ is found, 
because of Corinth’s reputation as a rich city noted for its luxury and licen-
tiousness; indeed the name Corinth developed the sense ‘brothel’ in English. 
Is Corinthian a word used by tapsters and others like them, or is it a word 
common among educated people and wrongly attributed by the Prince to 
the lower echelons of society? Iack, lad and boy are words which can be used 

20
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                    11

jocularly or scornfully and are to that extent common in an informal context, 
but the expressions proud Iack, a lad of mettle and a good boy are not, as far 
as we can tell, specifically informal—or at least are not found elsewhere in this 
register. These examples illustrate the problems of tracing informal English. 
Some authors may describe certain words or expressions as informal, though 
it is difficult  to  confirm such claims because the words are also found in a 
less marked register and it maybe difficult to judge from the context how to 
interpret the word. In quotation (2) is Prince Hal a reliable informant when 
it comes to reporting the language of tapsters or is he merely reporting what 
he thinks the language of tapsters is? It is precisely this difficulty in deciding 
whether a given word is used with particular connotations which makes the 
study of informal English so fascinating.
       How  then  does one determine which words constitute Shakespeare’s 
informal vocabulary? Informal English is often seen as a negative feature, be-
cause it is not part of polite language, for it includes the more colourful words 
in the language. Because it is set in contrast with formal English, it may be 
easier to think what formal English  is. This is the language used in careful 
writing and speech, when one is trying to create an impression of education, 
standing and respectability. It is usually associated with the standard written 
form of a language, that form one would teach to non-native speakers of the 
language. Perhaps it is possible to think of formal English as the core of a 
language which may be represented as an inner circle, with everything outside 
that circle being potentially informal. Outside that circle at its figurative top 
could be placed fashionable varieties, that usage employed by speakers trying 
to impress others with  their savoir faire, although usually they manage to 
overdo it. An example of this language is satirised by Mercutio in quotation 
(4). But when Cloten, Cymbeline’s rather stupid step-son, says with admirable 
rich words (Cym 2.3.17), this is serious, for Shakespeare wants us to under-
stand that this is a dull fellow trying to persuade others that he knows how to 
speak in a courtly way. At the bottom of the circle might lie the colloquialisms 
and abbreviated forms characteristic of speech, which are most frequently 
identified with those who take little care about their enunciation. These forms 
at the top and bottom are in principle open to all speakers of the language, for 
they can be assimilated with effort as exemplified by Prince Hal. To each side 
of the inner core might lie those varieties which are used by native speakers 
of English from  outside England, the speakers of English dialects, and the 
English of foreigners who often  mangle the language. Such forms are less 
frequently adopted by other speakers because they are part of a wider sys-
tem, and I do not include any of these “lateral” forms within the context of 
informal English, which I regard as something available to all speakers of the 
language. Sociolinguistics has taught us that we all use informal English from 

21
12                                          Norman F. Blake

time to time, whereas we do not suddenly break into Scots or Dorset dialect 
forms, if only because most of us could not do so with conviction.

            4.  The different  types of Shakespeare’s informal English
I have chosen Romeo and Juliet 2.3.136–160 as a specimen on which to base 
the analysis of Shakespeare’s informal English. It is reproduced from F with 
some readings from Quarto  1 [Ql]   and the  Fourth  Folio  [F4]  in  square 
brackets. Mercutio who  has been indulging  in  witticisms  at  the Nurse’s 
expense has just departed and has left her in an indignant state:

       (5)  Nur. I pray you sir, what sawcie Merchant was this that was so 
             full  of his roperie? [Ql roperipe; F4 Roguery]
             Rom. A Gentleman Nurse, that loues to heare himselfe talke, 
             and will speake more in a minute [Ql houre], then he will stand 
             to in  a Month.
             Nur.  And  a speake [Q1 stand to] any thing  against me,  Ile 
             take him downe, &  a were lustier then he is, and twentie such 
             Iacks: and if I cannot, Ile finde those that shall: scuruie knaue, 
             I am none of his flurt-gils, I am none of his skaines mates, and 
             thou must stand by too and suffer every knaue [Ql Iacke] to vse 
             me at his pleasure.
             [ Pet. I saw no man vse you at his pleasure: if I had, my weapon 
              Q1 toole] should quickly haue beene out, I warrant you, I dare 
             draw assoone as another man, if I see occasion [Q1 time and 
             place] in a good quarrell, and the law on my side.
             Nur. Now afore God, I am so vext, that euery part [Ql member] 
             about  me quiuers, skuruy  knaue [Ql  Iacke]: pray you  sir  a 
             word: and as I  told you, my young Lady bid  me enquire you 
             out, what she bid me say, I will keepe to my selfe: but first let 
             me tell  ye, if ye should leade her in a fooles paradise, as they 
             say, it were a very grosse kind of behauiour, as they say: for 
             the  Gentlewoman is yong: &   therefore, if you  should deale 
             double with her, truely it were an ill thing to be offered to any 
             Gentlewoman, and very weake dealing. 

In  the opening  of  the Nurse’s speech there are three expressions which 
might be considered informal: I pray you, sawcie Merchant and roperie. The 
word Merchant is typically informal in that it has lost almost all its standard 
meaning. OED “Merchant A”  sb. defines merchant as ‘one whose occupation 
is the purchase and sale of marketable commodities for  profit;  originally 
applied gen. to any trader in goods not manufactured or produced by him-
self ’. But when merchant is used informally, this  semantic information  is 

22
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                    13

reduced to ‘one . . . himself’, i.e. a man. The rest of the meaning has been 
discarded so that the outer form or surface of the word  is retained to add 
colour, but its inner semantic core is abandoned. It is not in  itself decisive 
of informality  that the merchant is characterised as sawcie, since a real mer-
chant could easily be “rude”. It  is characteristic of informal  language that 
merchant can be replaced by other words which are also drained of  their 
semantic meaning so that it  would make little   apparent difference to the 
Nurse’s message if she had referred to him here as scuruie knaue (a phrase 
she uses later of Mercutio) rather than sawcie Merchant. There are a large 

‘ number of words in Shakespeare’s works whose meaning is no more than 
man, young man’, especially those used in a jocular or  abusive way; they 
include kern, knaue, lob, lozel, lubber, milksop, noddy, patch, punk, quat as well 
as those which are Christian names such as Jack. But, as we shall see, the 
word merchant (which is recorded by OED sb. 3 as ‘A fellow, “chap”’ from 
1549 to 1610) may have more resonance than at first seems apparent. Other 
concepts for different types of men and for parts of the body such as the head 
exist in variant informal  forms: block, noddle, mole, pash, pate, poll, sconce, to 
mention just a few.
       The word  roperie illustrates another category of informal word. Many 
words or phrases differ between F and Q and this variation may signal that 
one edition (usually Q) was trying  to make the word more accessible. This 
might be the  case here, although roperipe could be a simple typographical 
variant. However, the word does not fit into the context, because roperipe as an 
adjective means ‘Ripe for the gallows’ (OED “Roperipe”), but the syntax de-
mands a noun, and as a noun it means ‘one who is ripe for the gallows’ which 
is not semantically appropriate. The change from roperie to roperipe may in-
dicate that some had difficulty understanding roperie—a suggestion which is 
strengthened by its change to Roguery in F4. It is possible to take roperie as a 
malapropism for roguery, or to assume it was a misprint for roperipe, although 
neither explanation is acceptable, and roperie is retained in Q2, F2 and. F3. 
OED  glosses “Ropery” as ‘1. A place where ropes are made; a rope-walk. 2. 
Trickery, knavery, roguery.’ Neither sense is common, with 1 recorded from 
1363 and 2 first recorded in this passage. It is claimed by some editors that 
rope was slang for penis, but evidence that this was so in the sixteenth century 
is absent. Nevertheless, it is likely that both roperie and roperipe were informal 
words with a sexual overtone probably implying ‘lewd talk’.
       At   first sight  it seems as though merchant and roperie are introduced 
merely as informal words of little semantic content, suggesting “chap, fellow” 
for the first  and “underhand behaviour, bawdy talk” for the second. But we 
need to take account of the form skaines mates a few lines later. OED “Skaines 
mate” indicates that its ‘origin and exact meaning [are] uncertain’ and has this 
example as its sole quotation. Some editors translate ‘cut-throat companions’ 

23
14                                          Norman F. Blake

by linking it to skene ‘knife’; but others relate it to a dialect form skain ‘rascal’. 
Green (1998:1079) defines “skainsmate”, of which this is his only example, 
as ‘a prostitute. [ety. unknown. . . . The context seems to indicate a prostitute. 
?dial skain, a dagger; thus fig. a penis or skein of thread or wool, and thus 
relates to the ‘sewing’ imagery of intercourse (cf. NEEDLE   WOMAN)].’ 
Although Green’s comment is helpful, it may not go far enough. At one level 
Shakespeare has taken ordinary words, merchant, roperie and skain, and de-
prived them of their main semantic content. But at another level he has added 
to their meaning by linking words together so that merchant, roperie and skains 
mate, all connected with merchants and merchandise consisting of rope or 
wool, are given a sexual meaning. They are informal, but they also have a witty 
resonance which links them together in a quite unexpected way. In addition 
to its semantic link with merchant and roperie, skains mates is associated with 
flurt-gill,  based on the female name Gill/Jill. The name Jill was a common 
name for a woman (as in the nursery rhyme Jack and Jill ), often used depre-
catingly, and the verbal noun flirting is recorded from 1593. The compound 
flirt-gill  is attested here for the first  time in  the Oxford English Dictionary, 
though some examples also occur in the early seventeenth century. It may be a 
Shakespearian compound, though both elements were common enough and 
the form Gill-flirt  is found from 1632 in the Oxford English Dictionary.
       Two  of the  three words in the  Nurse’s opening speech, merchant and 
roperie, are not only linked but  also clearly informal, though  more evoca-
tive than the concept “informal” might suggest. They are supported by sawcie, 
which is also informal. Numerous other adjectives of this type occur through-
out the plays, and we have noted scuruie in the Nurse’s second speech. Others 
include bully, cogging, cony-catching, cozening, lousy, ramping; testy as well as 
some which maybe Shakespearian creations.
       The third possible informal expression in the opening of this first speech 
is I pray you. This phrase also presents problems of interpretation, since it may 
be the formal main  clause which has a subordinate object clause depend- 
ent on it. But F has a question mark at the end of this first sentence and that 
question mark is often reproduced in modern editions (Levenson 2000:237). 
Most take this to be a robust direct question, with I  pray you as a discourse 
marker emphasising the question which follows, rather than a main clause 
introducing a tentative indirect question. The expression I pray you appears 
elsewhere as pray you or prithee, and it fulfils much the same function as mod-
ern please, though these expressions are less formal. There are a number of 
verbs which resemble pray in this discourse function, including quoth, say, 
speak, tell and think as well as slightly different verbs like see. Say as a discourse 
marker occurs in different forms, such as the preterite and past participle. Sev-
eral interesting examples of say in Shakespeare’s works may be misinterpreted 
by editors. When in As You Like It Orlando leads in the exhausted Adam, who 

24
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                    15

can barely walk, Adam prepares to die and says his farewell to Orlando: Heere 
lie I downe, And measure out my graue. (AY 2.6.2). Orlando then replies with a 
lengthy harangue, in which he says he will bring food shortly and that Adam 
must not die in the meantime. In the middle of this speech, he says:

       (6)                           but if thou  diest 
             Before I come, thou art a mocker of my labor.
             Wel said, thou look’st cheerely.
             And  Ile be with thee quickly:                          (AY  2.6.11–14)

Although Adam says nothing in response to Orlando’s care of him, Orlando 
exclaims Wel said. Some editors assume that Adam has mumbled something, 
and Hattaway  (2000:115) comments “This  either  means ‘Well  done’, or 
indicates that Adam makes some inarticulate response.” Well said is hardly 
an appropriate response to some inarticulate mumbling, and this expression 
must be a discourse marker equivalent to modern Come on or even Snap out 
of it. The other alternative, Well done, suggested by Hattaway and offered by 
other editors, does not seem appropriate, since it operates less as a discourse 
marker than as a compliment in Modern English.
       An equally contentious example occurs at the start of the play where Orlan-
do and Adam come on stage together. Hattaway’s comment “The play begins in 
the middle of a conversation between Orlando and Adam.” (2000:73) is charac-
teristic of editors’ comments on this play’s opening, though none actually explain 
why they believe these two are in mid-conversation. The opening sentence is:

       (7)  As I  remember Adam, it  was vpon this  fashion bequeathed 
             me by will,  but poore a thousand Crownes, and as thou saist, 
             charged my brother  on his  blessing to breed mee well: and 
             there begins my sadnesse:                                 (AY 1.1.1–4) 

Presumably, editors accept as thou saist to mean that Adam was speaking to 
Orlando about the will before they entered. But Adam is an old servant who 
is hardly likely to remind Orlando of the terms of his father’s will and, in the 
play, he gives no indication of being informed on such matters. He does not 
speak until Orlando has finished his lengthy  diatribe and then only to  say 
that Orlando’s brother is approaching. There is no indication in this opening 
of a conversation in any meaningful way. It is better to take as thou saist, as a 
discourse marker meaning no more than ‘assuredly, indeed’. A more forceful 
marker is not appropriate to Orlando’s character, for he is portrayed as gentle 
and cultivated. But he does feel strongly about the position he is in and so 

25
16                                          Norman F. Blake

this marker is intended not to  tell us that Adam  has reminded him of  the 
terms of the will, but of the injustice that  he, Orlando, suffers under.
       Examples of “say” and other verbs are provided by other plays. When the 
Venetians are taunting Shylock that his daughter has run away, he exclaims: 
I say my daughter is my flesh and bloud. (MV 3.1.34). Here F has no comma 
after I say, and this punctuation is followed in modern editions; but it is an 
expression which could readily be replaced by Truly, In sooth etc. and may be 
best accepted as a discourse marker. When Portia and Nerissa return home 
after the trial scene and are standing before the house, they hear music which 
Nerissa says is Portia’s own. To this Portia responds: Nothing is good I see with-
out respect, (MV 5.1.99). Once again F has no commas, but here most editors 
do insert them making I see a discourse marker. The marriage of Antony to 
Octavia is greeted with surprise by some, for when  told by  Enobarbus of 
this marriage Menas responds: Pray’ye sir. (AC 2.6.113), which is rather like 
modern You don’t say. Modern editors often add a question mark, but it could 
just as easily be a statement expressing surprise or disbelief.
       Discourse markers, a significant feature of conversation, help to em-
phasise certain statements, inject more emotion into a conversation, indicate 
some hesitation on the part of the speaker, or act as a hedge in the dialogue. 
Although they are found most often at the beginning of a sentence, they can 
occupy any position depending on the function they fulfil. Two which occur 
at the beginning of a sentence are why and what, and they can cause difficulty 
in interpretation since there is uncertainty as to whether they are discourse 
markers or interrogative adverbs. Some are clearly discourse markers, though 
almost drained of any meaning. When Petruccio’s servants greet the recently 
returned Grumio, each utters a greeting in turn, and these consist of Welcome 
home or How now or What (TS 4.1.95–99), where What is no different as a 
greeting from Welcome home and How now. All three are informal. But why 
and what have more significant uses in other contexts. What expresses sur-
prise, impatience or even exultation, whereas why may either introduce a new 
topic or else express reluctance or anxiety. These interjections are found on 
the lips of members of all classes. Antony can say to Cleopatra: What Gyrle, 
though gray Do somthing mingle with our yonger brown, yet ha we A Braine (AC 
4.9.19–21), and young Rutland cries out in anguish to Clifford: I neuer did thee 
harme: why wilt thou slay me? (3H6 1.3.39). Other words resemble discourse 
markers but are not as frequently attested as one might expect with discourse 
markers. When Hamlet acknowledges that Polonius has just announced the 
arrival of the players, he says: Buzze, buzze. (Ham 2.2.395), which has a wider 
range of implications than would be conveyed by a simple discourse marker. 
But this is appropriate for someone of Hamlet’s rank, since he is revealing his 
wit as well as his linguistic dexterity.

26
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                    17

       In  the foregoing discussion some differences between Q1 and F in quo-
tation (5) are highlighted. These are important not only because they may re-
veal what words were informal, but also because they may indicate that words 
dying out of  the language survived longest at an informal level. Examples 
take several forms. The first is when several examples of a word in Q often, 
though not regularly, appear as a different word in the F, or even occasionally 
vice versa. Thus afeard in Q is often replaced in F by afraid, as when Costard, 
a Clown, says in Q a Conquerour, and a feard to speake? (LL 5.2.573–574), 
where F has afraid. Similarly, albeit is often replaced in F by although. Prob-
ably words like  afeard and albeit were obsolescent except in the informal 
language of less educated people. Likewise Q’s alate may be less formal than 
F’s of late, as many forms with initial (a-) representing a reduced preposition 
were gradually lost from the language.
       The second type is where a form in either Q or F  is unique in Shake-
speare and is omitted or replaced in the other  text. This may occur either 
because a form is otherwise obsolete or because the word is new not only 
in Shakespeare, but also in English. Queen Margaret, married by proxy in 
France to Henry V I, addresses her husband and sovereign in rather inflated 
language, although she refers to her ruder termes, such as my wit affoords (2H6 
1.1 [Add.Pass. A7]). In  a passage found only in F she addresses Henry as 
mine Alder liefest Soueraigne ([Add.Pass. A5]). The word alderliefest, formed 
from the Old English  genitive plural ealra ‘of all’ and leofost ‘dearest’, was ar-
chaic by the end of the fifteenth century. It is possible that this was regarded 
as old-fashioned and hence no longer appropriate in courtly circles; to that 

‘ extent it might be regarded as informal. A similar example is the form anchor 
an anchorite, hermit’,  found in  Q2 of  Hamlet (Add.Pass. E2), where it is 
used in the play within a play, where the language is often old-fashioned and 
distanced from the rest of the main play’s language.
       A  different example of this second type is the word answerer with the 
meaning ‘one who answers a charge or appeal’ which occurs in the Lear quar-
to, known today as The History of King Lear. Regan taunts Gloucester after his 
arrest for helping Lear to escape, and one might expect words from the in-
formal register in such utterances by Regan, because she is being aggressively 
rude as part of her attack on the old man. She says Be simple answerer, for we 
know the truth. (HL  sc.14.42), where F has simple answer’d (3.7.42), which 
makes less sense. This word answerer may be an informal variant of defendant. 
It occurs only here in Shakespeare, though it is found occasionally in English 
from the sixteenth century onwards. In consideration of this example, several 
other words in (-er)  as an agent noun appear to be less formal, even those 
added to a Latinate stem to form a hybrid. Examples which occur only once 
in Shakespeare include opener, pauser, perfumer and picker. Pauser, a noun in 
the expression the pawser, Reason. (Mac 2.3.111 ‘someone who hesitates to 

27
18                                          Norman F. Blake

evaluate something fully’), and perfumer in the sense of ‘one who fumigates a 
room’ are hapax legomena in English according to the Oxford English Diction-
ary, but opener in the sense of ‘one who reveals something’ was found in the 
language from the middle of  the sixteenth century. Picker was common in 
the informal phrase pickers and stealers ‘thieves, robbers’, but Hamlet extends 
the meaning to ‘hands, i.e. which do the stealing’ (Ham 3.2.323). There are 
many similar examples, which suggest that answerer might also be informal.
       A  third  type  is where Q  and F  have different words, both of  which 
are used by Shakespeare elsewhere, so that it is difficult to decide which is 
Shakespeare’s original form or even whether both are his. When Slender is 
complaining about being ill-treated  by Falstaff ’s companions, he refers to 
them as your cony-catching Rascalls, (MW 1.1.117) in F, where Q has your 
cogging companions. The verb cog and its participle cogging ‘cheating, deceptive’ 
occurs several times in Shakespeare, usually dismissively, as when Emilia ex-
claims Some cogging, cozening Slaue, (Oth 4.2.136). It also occurs in one other 
example in Merry Wives. The verb cony-catch and its past participle form cony-
catched occur elsewhere in Shakespeare, though not so frequently, but this 
example of cony-catching is the only time the present participial adjective oc-
curs. The sense of this verb is the same as cog, meaning ‘to cheat, deceive’. Both 
words were common at this time and either makes excellent sense in the pas-
sage, so it is difficult to choose between these two informal words as to which 
maybe genuine Shakespeare. It probably does not matter, for both have to be 
accepted as examples of Shakespearian informal language. Later, Mr Page 
says to Mr Ford in F Looke where my ranting Host of the Garter comes: (MW 
2.1.179), where Q uses ramping instead of ranting. The participial adjective 
ramping is found once elsewhere in Shakespeare in the sense ‘unrestrained, 
extravagant’. Constance, in berating the Duke of Austria, says What a foole 
art thou, A ramping foole, (KJ 3.1.47–48). This word belongs to the language 
of insults. The verb rant  occurs in Shakespeare, when Hamlet jumps into 
Ophelia’s grave and shouts at Laertes and thoul’t mouth, Ile rant as well as thou. 
(Ham. 5.1.280–281), where the sense is ‘talk loudly and boastingy’. This verb 
was more common and probably in Merry Wives it replaced ramping, which 
was less familiar. Both belong to a specialised vocabulary of insults, with rant 
being less hurtful than ramp, and it is often preferred by editors who think of 
the Host as loud-mouthed rather than unrestrained, though the difference is 
not great. In such cases both words belong to the informal register and the 
variation suggests that they were becoming generalised words of abuse which 
were losing their primary meanings and thus could be freely exchanged.
       In  quotation (5) we may note that Q1 has Iacke where F has knaue. The 
names, Jack, John and Jill/Gill, are used frequently as terms of contempt. Jack 
occurs as a generic name for a man as well as the figure that strikes the bell. 
Examples include: Since euerie Iacke became a Gentleman, There’s many a gentle 

28
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                     19

person made a Iacke. (R3 1.3.72–73), While I stand fooling heere, his iacke o’th’ 
Clocke (R2 5.5.60), scuruy-Iack-dog-Priest: (MW 2.3.57), I am withered like an 
olde Apple Iohn. (1H4 3.3.4), poore-Iohn: (Tem 2.2.27 ‘type of fish’), and Iohn 
a-dreames, (Ham 2.2.570). One might also mention Mrs Quickly’s corruption 
of genitive to Ginyes case; (MW 4.1.56 ‘Jenny’s case’), since it is not difficult to 
imagine this as a typical schoolboy corruption picked up by Shakespeare at 
grammar school. Abbreviations of names are also common and belong to the 
‘informal language Nan ‘Anne’, Ned and Yedward ‘Edward’, Hal ‘Henry’, Nick 
Nicholas’, Nob ‘Robert’ and others. There is also Dame Partlet the Hen, (1H4 
3.3.94 ‘Dame Pertilote’, Falstaff to Mrs Quickly).
       The use by the Nurse in  quotation (5)  of a for  ‘he’ is a colloquialism, 
reflecting informal pronunciation through the dropping of syllables or pho-
nemes. Such forms occur in the speech of all people, and this finds expression 
in Shakespeare’s plays in characters of all ranks. Sociolinguistics has revealed 
that we all drop initial /h/  in words when we are in an informal mode. Most 
people will say /i:/ rather than /hi:/  in  an utterance like “What’s he up to”, 
although we always write the (h) in representations of our own speech. We 
might not, however, include the (h) in any representation in writing  of the 
speech of lower-class characters. In Shakespeare’s plays this form is repre-
sented by the form (a), in the language of people of high or low status. The 
Princess of France in Love’s Labour’s Lost can say Who ere a was, a shew’d a 
mounting minde: (4.1.4). Presumably, dropping one’s h’s carried little or no 
stigma at the time. This presents a problem for the modern editor of the plays, 
who may represent this form by (’a), as though the speaker had dropped the 
/h/, which creates an uncomfortable feeling today that the speaker was being 
less than polite. It is more probable that at that  time people accepted that 
there were two forms of this word, an emphatic and an unemphatic (or infor-
mal) form, and that either could be used in writing, though one does find (a) 
attributed more frequently to less elevated characters. Other words which fall 
into this category include cos, a shortened form of cousin used more frequently 
by high-status characters, and many oaths to be considered below.
       A  more  interesting question is the status of  aphetic forms of  words. 
Most survive today only in their  longer forms, such as hospital and appren-
tice, which also occur as spital and prentice. In modern editions they may 
appear with an apostrophe: ’spital and ’prentice, as though editors think them 
non-standard. Certainly today where such forms occur, such as ’fraid (as in 
the common phrase ’fraid so), they are colloquial and, previously, writers like 
Swift were vehemently opposed to this type of shortening (Blake 1986). But 
it is more difficult to be certain what attitudes to such aphetic forms were in 
Shakespeare’s time. Some types of shortening were regarded as rhetorically 
elegant, but it is  doubtful whether this  applied to  forms like  ’spital. Some 
examples are found only in the speech of less elevated characters, as when 

29
20                                                Norman F. Blake

Grumio,  Petruccio’s  servant, uses lege for allege in  Nay ’tis no matter  sir, what 
he leges in Latine (TS  1.2.28). On   the balance of  probability   such forms  may 
be considered  informal.   After   all,  the  omission  or  addition   of  a morpheme 
at the  front   of  a  word  often  occurs  in  the  speech  of  those characters  who 
use malapropisms. Dogberry   uses opinioned for  pinioned when  he  says of the 
malefactors  Come, let them  be opinion’d. (MA    4.2.65),  which   as with   many 
malapropisms  suggests a confusion  of  words.  Both  verbs  pinion  and opinion 
were introduced  into  English  in  the middle  of the  sixteenth  century. Similarly 
the Second  Murderer   uses passionate as a variant  of  compassionate when, as 
he and his  companion  are about  to  murder  Clarence  in the  Tower, he  says: I 
hope this passionate humor of mine, will change, (R3  1.4.114–115).  That  is the 
reading of F, though  Q  and some modern  editors  replace this passionate humor 
of mine with  my holy humor. OED   ‘Passionate”  a. 5 records the  sense ‘Moved 
with  sorrow;  grieved, sad, sorrowful’  from  1586,  but this  example  from  Rich-
ard the Third  is its  first  for  the  allied  sense ‘inclined   to  pity,  compassionate’. 
But  compassionate was a relatively  recent  borrowing.   Are  we  to  understand 
a type   of  gallows   humour   here? Would    contemporaries   have  understood 
passionate, because the different reading in Q  suggests they might  not?  Is pas-
sionate in this sense an informal   usage?
        In   quotation   (5)  the Nurse   refers to  a very  grosse kind of behauior, and 
intensives like  gross are usually part  of  informal   language  which  may  have a 
short  existence as vogue words.  Gross in its  meaning  ‘glaring,  flagrant,  mon-
strous’ is recorded only  from  1581  (OED   “Gross” a. 4a), and should  probably 
be understood  as still  informal   in this  passage. The combination  of  very with 
gross is characteristically informal,   and  Mercutio   makes use of this  exaggera-
tion  in  quotation   (4).  The  use of  Latinate   adjectives  was often  regarded  as 
a sign of  excess, though  to  what  extent  all  such  cases should be considered 
ironic  or humorous   is difficult   to determine.   When  Armado   uses immaculate 
in his  My  Loue is most immaculate white and  red. (LL   1.2.87),  this was a  way 
of satirising   the  excesses of courtly   love language,  especially  as in  this  case 
Moth   responds Most immaculate  thoughts Master (LL   1.2.88, often   emended 
to maculate by  modern   editors).  A  word  like  excellent was over-used  at  this 
time as both  adverbial  and adjective, but  how  many of  the examples are to  be 
treated as ironic  is  more difficult    to determine   (Blake  2000).  When  Sir  An-
drew Aguecheek  exclaims  of  Feste’s song Excellent good, ifaith.  (TN   2.3.44), 
he is  trying   to imitate   fashionable   language; when  Poins  responds  to  Hal’s 
question as to  whether  he should  tell him   something  with  Yes: and let it be an 
excellent good thing. (2H4  2.2.28),  he is aping  elegant  language, as suggested 
by his use of sweet Hony (1H4   1.2.158);  and when  the Clown   in  The Winter’s 
Tale says thou talkest of an admirable  conceited fellow, (WT   4.4.203–204),   he 
uses admirable to  indicate   that  he knows   elegant language,  though   educat-
ed people  would   take this   as a sign  of  his  ignorance.  Other   types of  word 

30
                                   On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                             21

may also  be satirised.  The noun   humour appears to  have  been misused  as a 
fashionable  word  to  judge  by  the  way  it  is adopted   by some  of  the  lower-
class characters. It   is used  by Pistol   in  These be good Humors indeede. (2H4 
2.4.159) and  by Bottom  my chiefe humour is for a tyrant. (MN  1.2.24).  But  it is 
particularly   associated with  Nym.   He  uses it as both  noun  and  the  first  ele-
ment of  a compound  I  thanke thee for that humour. (MW   1.3.57),  here take the 
humor-Letter;  (MW    1.3.71–72).   The same  type  of  humour   is found   in  the 
malapropisms  and  other   misuses of   words,  associated especially  with   Mrs 
Quickly   and others,  who  use such forms  as allicholy for  melancholy, Canaries 
(possibly  for  quandary  although  that  word   is not  used by  Shakespeare) and 
adultery to  mean  something  like  ‘mayhem’.  Possibly  to be  regarded as simi-
lar are idiomatic,   semi-proverbial   phrases like  fooles paradise in quotation  (5) 
which  the  Oxford  English  Dictionary   shows  was common   at this  time   with 
the general  sense ‘seduce and  abandon’ (Cf.  Dent   1981:  F523).  There  are a 
number  of idiomatic   expressions which   may be considered  informal,   though 
they also occur  in more  formal  contexts. These include  such phrases as Ile goe 
wih  thee cheeke by iowle. (MN 3.2.339  ‘closely’),  I  haue tane you napping (TS 
4.2.46 ‘caught  you unawares in  the act’), the new made Duke that rules the rost, 
(2H6  1.1.106,  usually taken  to  mean ‘that  sits at  the head of  the  table, i.e. to 
be top dog’, though   the modern  equivalent  is rule  the roost), he is now at a cold 
sent. (TN.  2.5.119  ‘gone astray’) and  many others.  Some of  these phrases are 
semiproverbial  and are found  in  Tilley’s  collection   (Tilley   1950).
        The  spelling  and metre  in  F  and Q  suggest that  some words  were pro-
nounced  with  one  or  two  syllables  and  that  in  polysyllabic   words  a medial 
vowel was suppressed in  speech. Learned  words  are abbreviated  in  informal 
language. In Q  Mrs  Quickly    uses atomy as a variant of anatomy in  her exple-
tive Thou atomy, thou. (2H4  5.4.29, F has Anatomy), implying   someone who  is 
all bones, but with  a further  suggestion of  atom  ‘something diminutive’.   Simi-
lar abbreviated forms  are found  earlier in  the language. In  The Miller’s  Tale  in 
The Canterbury Tales some manuscripts  have astromye for astronomy, and this 
may represent an informal   usage (Blake  1979). In  other  cases in Shakespeare 
two forms  of a word  exist side by side relatively commonly,  such as parlous and 
perilous, and these forms  can interchange  between  F and  Q, though   whether 
the  form  parlous  was becoming   old-fashioned   and  informal   is  less certain. 
Perilous became the  standard  form,   just  as perfect had  replaced parfait,   but 
when  exactly  the  change occurred   and  how  speakers regarded  the  relation 
between the  two  forms  is more difficult   to  determine.  Sometimes  the  reduc-
tion  in the  number  of syllables pronounced   was expressed in writing   through 
omission  or an apostrophe:  the word  listening  regularly  omits  medial  (e) in  F 
no matter  who  the  speaker is, as in  Falstaff ’s it is worth  the listning  too (1H4 
2.5.215).  Presumably  the  pronunciation   with   two  syllables  was common   at 
this  time  and  should  not  be considered  informal.   But   a word  like  even can 

31
22                                          Norman F. Blake

be spelt in full or abbreviated to ev’n: Euen so by Loue, (TG 1.1.47), and And 
ev’n that Powre (TG 2.6.4). Is this variation significant or not? And if  it  is, 
should the shortened form be regarded as informal? The same can go for the 
omission or inclusion of non-lexical words like articles and prepositions. Are 
the verbs arrive and arrive at distinguished in their level of formality? There 
may be variation with the presence or absence of an article both between Q 
and F: as good deede (Q) and as good a deed (F, 1H4 2.1.29); and between the 
occurrence of the same phrase in different contexts: What no man at doore (TS 
4.1.106) and his Father is come from Pisa, and is here at the doore (TS 5.1.25–
26). In The Taming of the Shrew the first context is distinctly colloquial, as 
Petruccio rails at his servants, whereas in the second he is speaking in a more 
formal manner. These may be no more than compositors’ preferences, though 
such preferences may not be without significance for informal English. There 
are also words which are shortened at the end: Proball (Oth 2.3.329 ‘such as 
approves itself ’ ), a hapax legomenon, is probably a shortened form of probable, 
which Honigmann  (1997:201) compares with Dekker’s admiral for  admi-
rable. We might remember in this connection that other words like mechanic 
and practic from French were varied with the Latinate mechanical and practical 
so that speakers of the language were familiar with variant endings, though 
whether the forms carried any implication of formality/informality has yet to 
be shown.
       In  quotation (5) the Nurse’s afore God is an oath which fulfils a similar 
function to discourse markers. By their nature they are informal and used by 
all classes of people, especially in situations of anger and frustration, though 
they are especially associated with the everyday conversation of characters of 
lower status. They share features with other types of informal language, since 
the original words in  an oath may be corrupted  or abbreviated to prevent 
them from being blasphemous, as remains true today where Gee is a clipped 
form of Jesus. Consequently some oaths have lost their power to offend and 
are little more than discourse markers. The corruption of names of the deity 
are common enough. Marry may well be a variant of Mary, the mother of Je-
sus. God is turned into cock in such phrases as By Cocke (Ham 4.5.61 in a song 
sung by Ophelia), Cockes passion, (TS 4.1.105, spoken by Grumio), and By 
cocke and pie, (MW 1.1.283, spoken by Mr Page), the last being possibly a cor-
ruption of God and the service book of the Catholic Church. Some commen-
tators think it may be literally a cock and pie, though given the frequency of 
the corruption of God to Cock, most listeners would think there was more to 
this oath than a simple culinary meaning. Jesus is corrupted to Gis in Ophelia’s 
song, where it appears as By gis, (Ham 4.5.58). The name of the deity is often 
reduced to the possessive singular inflection, represented by initial (s) or (z) 
in such forms as sblood ‘God’s Blood’, swounds ‘God’s wounds’, which occur 

32
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                     23

frequently in the quartos, but which after the blasphemy laws of James I were 
often replaced in F by anodyne expressions like heavens or mercy.
       There are several phrasal verbs in quotation (5): stand to, take down, stand 
by, be out and enquire out. In Modern English phrasal verbs such as to sit 
in start life  as colloquialisms, though many end up being accepted into the 
standard language. The same may apply to Elizabethan English, and some 
individual forms which were established by Shakespeare’s time had probably 
been accepted into formal language. However, others like stand to and take 
down have a secondary, sexual sense and presumably remained informal. A 
phrasal verb like stand by has two non-sexual meanings, namely ‘to support, 
assist’ and ‘to stand aside as an unconcerned spectator’, both of which could 
be invoked here. The status of these phrasal verbs is unclear, but their frequent 
use in this type of conversation suggests that the majority were informal.
       Insults are another source of informal language, though there are none 
in quotation (5). They fall into certain patterns, of which the most common 
is the pronoun thou, which expresses contempt or anger, followed by one or 
more adjectives which may not in themselves be informal but are made so 
by their occurrence in this context, and finally one or more nouns, many of 
which may well be rare and belong to the vocabulary of insults. Thus Macbeth 
addresses the Messenger who brings news of the English advance against 
Dunsinane as thou cream-fac’d Loone: (Mac 5.3.11). As it happens neither 
cream-fac’d nor Loone, ‘fellow, wretch’, is found elsewhere in Shakespeare. 
Though Loone is colloquial and probably always derogatory (OED “Loon” 1), 
cream-fac’d  ‘pale, wan’ is a form that one could imagine occurring in neutral or 
rhetorical contexts, for pale-faced and white-faced do not have such unfavour-
able connotations. Macbeth also addresses the Messenger as Thou Lilly-liuer’d 
Boy. (Mac 5.3.17), though boy is not so derogatory as loon. Another form of 
insult is employed by Macbeth in the same scene, for he calls the Messenger a 
number of names, consisting either of a simple or compound noun: Patch and 
Whay-face (Mac 5.3.17, 19), the latter taking up the sense of cowardice found 
in cream-fac’d and Lilly-liuer’d, but the former being a derogatory noun used 
several times as an insult in Shakespeare.
       Words with  sexual implications in quotation (5) are varied in Q1: toole 
for weapon, and member for part, though they have the same overtones (Wil-
liams 1997:205, 229, 310, 334). The problem is knowing where to draw the 
line in seeing a submerged sexual sense. Double-dealing, recorded in the Ox-
ford English Dictionary from 1529 as a noun and 1587 as an adjective, lies 
behind the expression deal double, the first quotation under OED “Double B” 
adv. 3. The verb deal has the sense ‘to have sexual intercourse’ (OED “Deal” v. 
11b) from 1340 to 1662, which may be implied by the use of the phrase deal 
double rather than the less explicit double-dealing. If the noun dealing had as-
sumed a sexual significance from the verb, it could colour our understanding 

33
24                                          Norman F. Blake

of weak. Some editors accept that Shakespeare wrote wicked instead of weak; 
but if dealing has a sexual implication, then weak may be right, for only ‘to 
deal double’ might in the Nurse’s view be no more than ‘weak dealing’. If so, 

‘ this raises the question how to understand ill thing, which may have the sense 
wicked matter’, but could also be implying ‘penis’. After all, thing is used by 

( Shakespeare to suggest someone or something contemptible, O thou Thing, 
 WT  2.1.84). The problem of how much of this passage contains sexual in-
nuendo and how many of its words should be included in  the category of 
informal English may never be resolved.
       At  the more elevated level of English there are words which may have 
been current among certain types of people and which  Shakespeare used 
ironically to  suggest characters who were social climbers with pretensions. 
When the Hostess addresses her husband Pistol as ‘Prythee honey sweet Hus-
band, let me bring thee to Staines. (H5 2.3.1–2), she is trying, with the phrase 
honey sweet, to ape the language of her betters. Poins reverses the expression 
in addressing Prince Hal as my good sweet Hony Lord, (1H4 1.2.158), another 
example of a speaker overreaching himself. However, when Helen in Troilus 
and Cressida addresses Pandarus as My Lord Pandarus, hony sweete Lord. (TC 
3.1.64), it is to suggest that Pandarus uses this type of expression too often in 
his conversation, which indeed he does later in the scene addressing Helen as 
hony sweete Queene: (TC 3.1.138). It may be difficult to decide in many cases 
whether this type of language should be classified as informal, for it is making 
fun of the inflated language of gentility.
       Other  words occur in contexts which are insulting or potentially so. For 
example, alias never occurs in a legal, but only in a derogatory context; how-
ever, whenever it occurs, its meaning is ‘otherwise known as’. Lavatch in All’s 
Well That Ends Well can say The blacke prince sir, alias the prince of darkenesse, 
alias the diuell. (AW 4.5.42–43), and Menenius in Coriolanus can say a brace 
of vnmeriting proud, violent, testie Magistrates (alias Fooles) (Cor 2.1.42–44). 
Latinate words are used by characters who try to impress, though there is 
nothing in the words to indicate they are informal. In  such cases, it may be 
the general attitude to excessive borrowing which was under attack. For ex-
ample, Pistol, Polonius and various clowns use perpend in the sense ‘pay heed 
to, consider’. Thus Pistol says perpend my words O Signieur Dewe, (H5 4.4.8) 
to the French soldier he has captured; Polonius says to the king and queen: 
Thus it remaines, and the remainder thus. Perpend, (Ham 2.2.105–106); and 
Touchstone when addressing Corin in As You Like It says: learne of the wise 
and perpend: (3.2.64–65). All are situations where the speaker is trying to 
impress the addressee, and we may assume that perpend was associated with 
pomposity.
       These examples raise the  question of   the  status of  foreign  words. 
I suggested earlier in reference to Corinthian that foreign  words were not 

34
                               On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                    25

borrowed as part of the informal vocabulary, but some do end up as part of 
that vocabulary. There are several ways in which this could happen. Because 
foreign words and morphemes are often considered affected and ridiculous by 
speakers of a language, the corruption of a word by adding a foreign morpheme 
to it may lead to its isolation from the rest of the context. In Modern English 
the addition of final (-a) is designed to add humour by suggesting words are 
Italianate, as in the old advertisement Drinka pinta milka day. This is found 
in Shakespeare in older songs, but whether the morpheme was introduced 
for the same reason is less certain. In Q2 the Gravedigger in Hamlet sings 
O me thought there a was nothing a meet. (5.1.64). Moustache is a French loan 
in English, but when it is given the form mustachio, which is either Spanish 
or Italian, it  is  humorous and is used only by characters who are extrava-

( gant in their language. Gadshill uses it as part of a derogatory expression 
 these mad Mustachio-purple-hu’d-Malt-wormes 1H4 2.1.74–75) and Armado 
as part of his attempt to enrich his language: with his royall finger thus dal-
lie with my excrement, with my mustachio: (LL 5.1.98–99). The malapropisms 
noted earlier involve foreign, usually Latinate, words and fulfil much the same 
function. Some words are given an apparently English form, but retain their 
foreign look, as with Sir Toby’s he’s a Rogue, and a passy measures panyn: (TN 
5.1.198), where passy measures is a corruption of Italian passamezzo. In other 
cases a foreign word is introduced into English by a member of the upper 
class to create an affectionate, but quizzical, tone or simply to create confu-
sion. Lady Hotspur addresses her husband Come, come, you Paraquito, (1H4 
2.4.83), whereas Hamlet answers Ophelia’s request for an interpretation of 
the dumb-show prologue to the play within a play with: Marry this is Miching 
Malicho, that meanes Mischeefe. (Ham 3.2.131–132), which may well be de-
signed to confuse her. The origin of Malicho (the quartos spell it Mallico) is 
uncertain, though it is usually understood as a form of Spanish malhecho, the 
form adopted in  some editions. Otherwise, foreign words are mostly used 
by braggarts like Pistol and Armado who want to  boast or by pedants like 
Holofernes who wish  to  impress others with their  learning and  sophisti- 
cation. The former use words from modern European languages, as Sly does 
with Paucas pallabris, (TS Ind.1 5, a corruption of Spanish) and Sir Toby does 
with Cubiculo: (TN 3.2.50), but the latter words from the classical languages. 
However, the influence of foreign languages goes deeper than that, for some 

- morphemes may have become anglicised, as is true of the Dutch diminutive 
 kin, which  is used to create a suggestion of affectionate familiarity. This is 
found in Fabian’s This is a deere Manakin to you (TN 3.2.51) and by Edgar as 
Mad Tom in for one blast of thy minikin mouth, (HL sc.13.39).
       Reduplicating forms are traditionally regarded as informal, though some 
do appear in more formal writings and to that  extent are like phrasal verbs 
which are also gradually accepted into the standard language. Thus hurly burly 

35
26                                          Norman F. Blake

is used by the witches in the sense ‘battle, tumult’: When the Hurley-burley’s 
done, (Mac 1.1.3), and in this sense it was used by historians and others at 
the time. Henry IV uses it to Worcester, one of the rebels, as an adjective in: 
Of hurly-burly Innouation: (1H4  5.1.78), referring to ‘warlike insurrection’, 
though doubtless using  hurly-burly  deliberately (because of its  informal 
nature) to get across his displeasure and sense of outrage. Other forms of 
this type are simply informal:  hugger mugger ‘secretly’ (Ham 4.5.82), kickie 
wickie (AW  2.3.277), otherwise unknown but  assumed to be a humorous 
term for ‘mistress’ and later Folios have kicksie wicksie, and Pell, mell, ‘in a 

(‘ confused melee’ (LL 4.3.344). One might include in this group linsie wolsy 
 nonsense, hodge podge of words’ AW 4.1.11). The reduplication may be 

( expressed as two words, as in Evan’s pribbles and prabbles, ‘useless chat’ 
 MW   1.1.50). Other  pairs like  this include  flout ’em, and cout ’em: (Tem 
3.2.123, in a song), snip, and nip, (TS 4.3.90) slish and slash, (TS 4.3.90), he 
scotcht him, and notcht him (Cor 4.5.191–192), to say nothing of the Prouer-
bes, and the No-verbes. (MW 3.1.96), and Cesar, Keiser and Pheazar (MW 
1.3.9). Many of  these forms are said by lower-class characters, but by no 
means all of them. Some of these words on their own are part of ordinary 
vocabulary, and it is only when they are paired in this way that they become 
informal. Others  are invented words for  the occasion, like No-verbes and 
Pheazar.
       The authenticity of a word like prenzie, in the phrases The prenzie, Ange-
“lo? (MM 3.1.92) and In prenzie gardes; (MM 3.1.95), is questioned by OED 
 Prenzie” and by some editors (Bawcutt 1991:234), though no satisfactory 
emendation is found (Wells & Taylor 1988:802 emend to precise). Its mean-
ing appears to be something like ‘prim,  precise’ and its context suggests a 
derogatory word, even possibly an insult, for in the first example it is used by 
Claudio who has been condemned to death by Angelo and in the second by 
his sister Isabella, who uses it in association with the cunning Liuerie of hell and 
presumably picked it up from him. It  is not  unexpected that such informal 
words may not appear elsewhere and we may accept the word as genuine, 
even though we do not know its precise meaning. Other words are of uncer-
tain origin, although they occur more frequently. Old Capulet dismisses Ty-
balt, who shows signs of disobedience with you are a Princox, goe, (RJ 1.5.85). 
This word, meaning ‘disobedient fellow’, is a hapax legomenon in Shakespeare, 
but is found occasionally in English, spelt either in -cox or -cock, from 1540 
(OED “Princock, -cox”).
       While   it  is impossible to  cover all aspects of Shakespeare’s informal 
English in this article, I have tried to show the interest that exists in compil-
ing a dictionary of this sort and to illustrate some of the difficulties that lie in 
wait for those trying to tackle this area of lexicography.

36
                                   On Shakespeare’s Informal Language                             27

                                                         Notes

         *  This  article is  based on a shorter paper delivered at  a conference of the 
Dictionary  Society of  North   America held  at the  University  of  Michigan,  Ann 
Arbor, on  6-10 May 2001. I  am indebted to  the participants, especially Professor 
Eric Stanley, for their comments and suggestions made after my talk.

( 1.        The  Sonnets are quoted from Booth 1977, the plays from the First  Folio 
 Hinman  and Blayney 1996) unless a quarto text is specified (Allen and Muir 1981, 
where available, or other  facsimiles). However, line  references are to Wells  and 
Taylor 1988.
         2. The  following  abbreviations of Shakespeare’s works are used: Antony and 
Cleopatra AC; As You Like It AY;  All’s Well That Ends Well AW;  Coriolanus Cor; 
Cymbeline Cym; Hamlet Ham; Henry IV Parts I and II 1H4/2H4; Henry V H5; Henry 
VI Parts II and III  2H6/3H6;  The History of King Lear (Q ) HL; The Tragedy of King 
Lear (F) KL;  Love’s Labour’s Lost LL; Much Ado About Nothing MA; Macbeth Mac; 
Measure for Measure MM; A Midsummer Night’s Dream MN;  The Merry Wives of 
Windsor MW; Othello Oth;  Richard II and III   R2/R3;  Romeo and Juliet RJ; Troilus 
and Cressida TC; The Tempest Tem; Twelfth Night TN; The Taming of the Shrew TS; 
The Winter’s Tale WT.

                                                 Works       Cited

Allen, Michael J. B., and Kenneth Muir. 1981. Shakespeare’s Plays in Quarto. A Facsimile 
         Edition. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.
Bawcutt, Nigel W. 1991. Measure for Measure. The Oxford Shakespeare. Oxford. Oxford 
         University Press.
Blake, Norman F. 1979. “Astromye” in “The Miller’s Tale”. Notes and Queries 224: 110–111. 
——— . 1981. Non-standard Language in English Literature. London: Deutsch. 
——— . 1986. Jonathon Swift, and the English language. Englisch Amerikanische Studien 8: 
         105–119.
——— . 1989. Standardizing Shakespeare’s non-standard language. In: Joseph B. Trahern Jr. 
         (ed.). Standardizing English: Essays in the History of Language Change in Honor of John 
         Hurt Fisher. Tennessee Studies in Literature 31. Knoxville: University of Tennessee 
         Press, 57–81.
——— . 1992. Why and what in Shakespeare. In: Toshiyuki Takamiya and Richard Beadle 
         (eds.). Chaucer to Shakespeare: Essays in Honour of Shinsuke Ando. Cambridge: Brewer, 
         179–193.
——— . 2000. Excellent in Shakespeare. In: Dieter Kastovsky and Arthur Mellinger (eds.). 
         The History of English in a Social Context: A Contribution to Historical Sociolinguistics. 
         (Trends in Linguistic Studies and Monographs 129). Berlin and New York: Mouton 
         de Gruyter, 1–23.
Booth, Stephen. 1977. Shakespeare’s Sonnets Edited with Analytic Commentary. New Haven: 
         Yale University Press.
Dent, R.W. 1981. Shakespeare’s Proverbial Language: An Index. Berkeley, Los Angeles, 
         London: University of California Press.
Edelman, Charles. 2000. Shakespeare’s Military Language; A Dictionary. London, New 
         Brunswick, NJ: Athlone.
Gaskell, Phillip. 1978. From Writer to Reader: Studies in Editorial Method, Oxford. Clarendon 
         Press.

37
28                                                      Norman   F. Blake


Green, Jonathon. 1998. Cassell’s Dictionary of Slang. London: Cassell.
Hattaway, Michael.  2000.  As You Like It.  The  New Cambridge  Shakespeare. Cambridge: 
          Cambridge University  Press.
Hinman,  Charlton,   and Peter  W.  M.  Blayney.  1996. The First  Folio  of Shakespeare. The 
          Norton  Facsimile. 2nd edn. New York and London:  W. W. Norton.
Honigmann,  Ernst   A.  J. 1997.  Othello. The  Arden  Shakespeare 3rd series. Walton-on-
          Thames: Thomas Nelson.
Levenson, Jill   L.   2000.  Romeo and Juliet  (The  Oxford   Shakespeare). Oxford:   Oxford 
          University  Press.
Rubinstein, Frankie.  1984.  A Dictionary  of Shakespeare’s Sexual Puns and their Significance. 
          London,  Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Schäfer, Jürgen. 1980. Documentation in  the O.E.D.:  Shakespeare and Nashe as Test Cases. 
          Oxford:  Clarendon Press.
Sokol, B. J. and Mary Sokol. 2000. Shakespeare’s Legal Language: A Dictionary. London, New 
          Brunswick,  NJ: Athlone.
Spevack, Marvin.  1993.  A Shakespeare Thesaurus. Hildesheim, Zürich, New York:  Georg 
          Olms. 
Tilley,  Morris  P. 1950. A Dictionary  of Proverbs in England in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth 
          Centuries. Ann Arbor:  University of  Michigan  Press.
Wills,  Stanley, and Gary Taylor (gen. eds.). 1988. William  Shakespeare, The Complete Works, 
          Compact Edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Williams,  Gordon.  1997. A Glossary of Shakespeare’s Sexual Language. London and Atlantic 
          Highlands,  NJ: Athlone.

38
                                 TANYA     POLLARD


                               “A  Thing   Like    Death”:  
                     Sleeping    Potions    and   Poisons   in  
     Romeo     and    Juliet    and  Antony       and   Cleopatra



R omeo  and Juliet and Antony and Cleopatra abound in references to 
potions, both soporific and poisonous. These ambivalent drugs suspend 
the plays uneasily between competing plot trajectories, calling attention 
to other rifts and tensions. As Shakespeare’s only double tragedies and, 
along with Othello, his only ventures into the Italianate “tragedy of love,” 
the plays represent a hybrid genre intrinsically divided between the domain 
of tragedy (death) and that of comedy (erotic desire).1 Both plays, accord-
ingly, toy with genres, veering sharply between almost slapstick comedy 
and unsettling tragic intensity.2 Although critics have noticed the generic 
ambivalence that characterizes these plays, its significance has not received 
much discussion, perhaps in part due to lack of attention to the curious 
potions that correspond to the plays’ many oppositions. In the context of 
early modern pharmacy, the narcotic soporific drink, with its ambiguous 
position between medicine and poison, reflects and comments on the plays’ 
uncertain generic status. If the promise of ease, pleasure, and reawakening 
links sleeping potions with the realm of comedy, their implicit threat of 
death evokes the specter of tragedy as well. While the nature of potions is 
uncertain for much of these plays, their final casting as poisons upholds the 
plays’ generic status as tragedy, and yet it suggests that the poison of tragedy 
may be, in its own paradoxical way, medicinal.


Renaissance Drama, Volume 32 (2003): pp. 95–121. Copyright © 2003 Northwestern 
University Press.

                                                   29

39
30                                             Tanya Pollard

       The juxtaposition of narcotic potions and generic oscillation in the two 
plays also raises larger questions about the significance of these potions and 
their relationships to the plays in which they appear. As Derrida has observed, 
the disturbingly uncertain nature of drugs has offered a vocabulary for the 
ambiguous status of language and literature at least since Plato’s time.3 In his 
notorious attack on poetry in The Republic, Plato refers to literature as a phar-
makon, a dangerous blend of poison and remedy. Aristotle turned a similar 
vocabulary toward a different end, arguing that plays could have a medicinal 
value by bringing about a katharsis, or purgation, of the emotions they elicit. 
In early modern England, writers echoed and varied this debate by drawing 
on the language of pharmacy to describe the effects of theater on spectators. 
Disapproving moralists referred to plays as “charmed drinkes, &  amorous 
potions,”4 “vigorous venome,” and “Soule-devouring poyson.”5 Supporters, 
meanwhile, described playwrights as “good Phisitions” and mulled over the 
various effects of theatrical “potions.”6 In the context of these literary attacks 
and defenses, what does it mean for Shakespeare to juxtapose narcotic and 
poisonous drugs and align them with generic oscillations? And further, why, 
after experimenting with this juxtaposition in  an early play, repeat it late in 
his career? Shakespeare’s treatment of ambiguous potions and their relation-
ship to the world  of the play in Romeo and Juliet and Antony and Cleopatra 
offers insights into their meaning in his theatrical vocabulary.

                                                       * * *
The device of  the sleeping potion  in  Romeo and Juliet occupies a crucial 
intersection between the play’s twin poles of desire and death and, similarly, 
between its warring  genres of comedy and  tragedy.7 While many critics 
see Mercutio’s death as the dividing point between the play’s comic begin-
ning and tragic ending, early foreshadowing and ongoing elements of farce 
suggest that the play’s generic fortunes stay intertwined much longer. The 
sleeping potion and,  by association, the  imaginative realm  of  sleep and 
dreams temporarily suspend the play’s identity, holding out the possibility of 
a return to comedy by offering the lovers the means to escape a tragic end-
ing. The foreclosure of this possibility, and accordingly the play’s resolution 
into a tragedy, does not become final  until  the intermediate mode of  the 
sleeping potion is replaced by Romeo’s actual poison.
       From the outset, the romantic love that is the focus of the play is directly 
associated with poison. In an attempt to divert Romeo from his unrequited 
yearning for Rosaline, Benvolio counsels,

       Tut,  man, one fire burns out another’s burning; 
       One pain is lessn’d by another’s anguish;
       Turn  giddy, and be holp by backward turning. 

40
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        31

       One desperate grief cures with another’s languish; 
       Take thou some new infection to thy eye, 
       And  the rank poison of the old will die.                     (1.2.45–50)8

Even before Juliet has entered the play, her imminent appearance in Romeo’s 
life is identified  with  the effect  of a poison, albeit a curative one. Despite 
the comic case and apparently pragmatic intentions  of Benvolio’s advice, 
the solution he offers has a distinctly  negative ring.  His  easy symmetries 

“ and correspondingly neat rhymes suggest that his cure will only replace one 
 anguish” and “desperate grief ” with another: Juliet, this model implies, will 
ultimately cause as much pain as does Rosaline.
       The dark undertones of the poisonous love cure proposed by Benvolio 
are echoed in Friar Lawrence’s meditations on the powers and perils of me-
dicinal herbs. Musing over the “baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers” he 
collects (2.3.4), the Friar considers the double-edged potential of his plants:

       Within   the infant rind  of this weak flower
       Poison hath residence, and medicine power:
       For this,  being smelt, with that part cheers each part; 
       Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart
       Two such opposed kings encamp them still
       In  man as well as herbs: grace and rude will;
       And  where the worser is predominant
       Full  soon the canker death eats up that plant.           (2.3.19–26)

In explicating how herbal concoctions contain the potential for both poison 
and medicine, the Friar can be seen as unwittingly describing the play itself, 
or the erotic  passion that the play dramatizes. The  flower’s “infant  rind” 
evokes the extreme youth associated with the  lovers; Shakespeare point-
edly makes Juliet even younger than the already young girl of  his source, 
and both  of  the protagonists are portrayed  as distinctly  adolescent, still 
tended and controlled by their parents.9 The Friar’s emphasis on the tension 
between the two “opposed kings,” similarly, calls to mind the feud that lies at 
the core of the play. His reduction of the conflict, however, to an opposition 
between grace and “rude will,” or lust, offers too  simple an understanding 
of passion, one at odds with the portrait  offered by the play itself. By dif-
ferentiating between the scent, which cures, and the taste, which kills, the 
Friar  suggests that the  primary  distinction  between  cordial and  poison 
is one of degree: love may be broached, but not consumed. Although  his 
identification  of desire with  the triumph  of  “the canker death” accurately 

41
32                                             Tanya Pollard

foreshadows the play’s ending, his moralistic condemnation of passion runs 
counter to the play, both in the jubilant celebrations of love endorsed by its 
comic moments and in the dignity ultimately bestowed on the lovers in the 
tragic close.
       Beyond its relevance within the world of the play, the Friar’s meditation 
on the proximity of medicine and poison would have resonated with broader 
contemporary concerns. In Shakespeare’s time, as now, the line between med-
icine and poison was a fine one, largely defined by degree: as the physician 
Paracelsus (1493–1541) famously asserted, “Poison is in everything, and no 
thing is without  poison. The dosage makes it either a poison or a remedy.”10 
This ambiguous potential was particularly unsettling in the rapidly  chang-
ing and controversy-ridden state of contemporary medical opinion, in which 
consensus regarding the correct contents, preparation, and dosage of remedies 
was hard to come by.11 New diseases and medicines from the New World 
and new translations of  classical medical writings  threatened the already 
tenuous stability of medical knowledge. Most significantly, the widespread 
impact of Paracelsus and the rapidly growing use of chemical medicine in the 
sixteenth century posed a severe challenge to the medical establishment.12 
Drawing on highly  toxic chemicals such as mercury and arsenic, as well as 
many of the  magically inflected remedies of the folk  tradition,  Paracelsus 
advocated a homeopathic doctrine of treating like with like, or poisons with 
poisons, directly contradicting the accepted Galenic model of curing through 
contraries, using herbal purgatives and expulsives to cleanse the body of its 
excessive humors. The emergence of increasingly potent drugs  into  the 
medical marketplace, combined with  shrill  accusations of pharmaceutical 
poisonings from each side, heightened consumers’ fears about the reliability 
of medicines of any sort.
       The Friar’s speech on poison and medicine draws on contemporary fears 
of uncertain medicines, implicitly highlighting the precariousness of Romeo’s 
position. Framed between Romeo’s unseen entrance and his interruption to 
announce his love for Juliet and his request to be wed, the speech implicitly 
associates the lovers’ fate with the equivocal effects of medicinal herbs. Ro-

“ meo echoes this vocabulary in his plea for the Friar’s support of his marriage: 
 Both our remedies,” he tells the Friar, “Within thy help and holy physic lie” 
(2.3.47–48). Unfortunately, as the Friar’s musings have just shown, the “rem-
edies” of his “holy physic” are distinctly risky. Not only are his professional 
judgment and authority shown to be questionable, casting doubt on his fit-
ness to diagnose and cure the problems of the play, but his ingredients are in 
themselves profoundly ambivalent, as capable of killing as of curing.
       The overlay of pharmacy, desire, and death in the Friar’s speech is echoed 
in the following act, when he and his holy physic are called upon for another 
remedy: this time to the lovers’ enforced separation after Romeo’s banishment 

42
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        33

for Tybalt’s death. In its presentation of one lover’s apparent death and the 
other’s readiness to die in response, this curious middle act provides an odd, 
almost farcical, foreshadowing of the play’s ending; it also offers a comic al-
ternative to such an ending. After Romeo’s duel with Tybalt, Juliet’s query 
for news of her love elicts a characteristically confused and frantic exclama-
tion from  her nurse: “he’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead! / We are undone, lady, 
we are undone. / Alack the day, he’s gone, he’s kill’d, he’s dead” (3.2.37–39). 
Despite the conventional understanding that the play becomes a tragedy after 
Mercutio’s death, the nurse’s breathless and repetitive hysteria, framed by the 
audience’s comfortable knowledge that Romeo is alive, makes this scene a 
comic parody of a death announcement.13 Following immediately upon the 
poetry of Juliet’s erotic epithalamium, the nurse’s misinformation introduces 
anxiety but fails to undermine the elated freedom of the lovers’ comic world.
       The woefully underinformed Juliet, however, responds to Romeo’s hypo-
thetical death by taking it as a figurative poison:

       Hath  Romeo slain himself? Say thou but “Ay” 
       And  that bare vowel “I” shall poison more 
       Than  the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
                                                                                          (3.2.45–47)

As long as Romeo’s death remains in the realm of language—and uncertain 
language at that—Juliet’s poisons remain limited to language as well. The 
wounding power of  the  letter “I”   goes deep, however, evoking the play’s 
broader concerns with the vulnerability of  the eye—and, correspondingly, 
the “I,” or subject—to the darts of love. The letter’s poisons prove powerful; 
in response to the nurse’s confirming  chorus of “I’s”,14 Juliet immediately 
leaps to proclamations of suicide: “Vile earth  to earth resign, end motion 
here, / And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier” (3.2.59–60). Even when 
it becomes clear that Romeo is still alive, news of his banishment and her 
wedding to Paris is enough to inspire doom: “I’ll   to the Friar  to know his 
remedy. / If all else fail, myself have power to die” (3.5.241–242). The Friar’s 
remedy is presented as an alternative, and perhaps an uneasy twin, to death. 
Once again, both the lovers’ remedies lie within  the Friar’s help and holy 
physic; Juliet’s figurative poisons hover uneasily between the threat of liter-
alization and the promise of being replaced with medicinal cures.
       Juliet echoes the association between remedy and death when she con-
fronts the  Friar himself. “If  in  thy  wisdom thou canst give no  help, / Do 
thou but call my resolution wise, / And  with  this knife  I’ll  help it present-
ly” (4.1.52–54). “I  long to  die,” she repeats shortly, “If what  thou speak’st 
speak not of remedy” (4.1.66–67). In introducing the sleeping potion, Friar 

43
34                                             Tanya Pollard

Lawrence, like Juliet, links it with death. If she has the strength of will to kill 
herself, he suggests,

       Then  is it likely thou wilt  undertake
       A  thing like  death to chide away this shame, 
       That  cop’st with death himself to scape from it. 
       And,  if thou  dar’st, I’ll give thee remedy.                   (4.1.73–76)

As a “thing like death,” the potion—or the comatose state it will induce—is 
intended to divert Juliet from “death himself,” functioning  as an apotropaic 
remedy.15 But the likeness is so persuasive that the distinction   becomes 
uncomfortably blurred. Even Juliet questions the drug’s reliability, wonder-
ing, “What if  it be a poison, which the Friar / Subtly hath minister’d to have 
me dead . . . ?” (4.3.24–25). This threat becomes a certainty to her audience 

“ the following morning: unable to  wake her,  the nurse cries hysterically: 
 Lady! Lady!  Lady! /  Alas, alas! Help, help!  My lady’s dead!”; and, “She’s 
dead, deceas’d! She’s dead! Alack the day!” (4.5.13–14, 23).
       While  the nurse’s grief is sincere—and the audience, in fact, cannot be 
sure that she is mistaken in believing Juliet dead—the echoes of farce in her 
frenzied interjections remind us that the idea of the contrived false death as 
a plot device is typically a motif of  comedy, or tragicomedy.16 Typically, the 
eventual discovery that the death is not real provides renewed grounds for 
festive celebration; Juliet’s temporary belief in Romeo’s death, shortly fol-
lowed by both the discovery that he was alive and the consummation of the 
lovers’ marriage, partly fits this model. With the advent of the sleeping po-
tion, however, the generic rules change: the nurse’s wails are simultaneously 
wrongheaded and prophetic, and our laughter is uneasy. While false deaths 
in comedy tend to be constructed of rumor only, Juliet’s is built of the more 
binding force of chemical intervention, a more dangerous realm for experi-
mentation. The nurse’s mistaken assumption will become true: Juliet’s am-
biguous potion ultimately, if indirectly, proves fatal.
       Juliet’s sleep has an uneasy dramatic status: as a likeness or imitation of 
death, it looks ahead to the tragedy of the play’s ending, yet as an apotropaic 
substitute for actual death, it suggests the prototypically comic possibility of 
young lovers’ triumph over adversity. In the first half of the play, sleep is as-
sociated with the carefree world of comedy. The Friar explicitly identifies it 

/ with the comforts of youth: “But where unbruised youth with unstuff ’d brain 
  Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign” (2.3.33–34). Similarly, 
Romeo associates sleep with serenity and ease. “Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, 
peace in thy breast,” he calls to the departing Juliet, “Would I were sleep and 
peace so sweet to rest” (2.2.186–187).

44
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        35

       Juliet’s artificial sleep, the pivot of the play’s action, becomes the occa-
sion for her own private theater. “My dismal scene I needs must act alone,” 
she comments before drinking the Friar’s potion (4.3.19). On the threshold of 
sleep, she is assailed by waking dreams, or nightmares, of its consequences:

       Alack,  alack! Is it not like that I
       So early waking, what with loathsome smells
       And  shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, 
       That  living mortals, hearing them, run mad. . . ? (4.3.45–48)

Juliet’s terror of the  uncertain state which  she will  be entering  leads her 
aptly to thoughts of mandrakes. A source of much fascination in the Renais-
sance, the mandrake, like Friar Lawrence’s herbs, was understood to be both 
poisonous and medicinal.17 As a medicine, it was attributed soporific and 
aphrodisiac powers, linking it  with  Juliet’s sleeping potion as well as with 
the love that necessitates it.18 As the name suggests, mandrakes were also 
considered quasi-human: popular lore held that the plant sprung from the 
seed of a hanged man, and that when the root was dug up, it  would emit 
screams that would kill or madden anyone within hearing distancc.19 Simul-
taneously animate and inanimate, fertile and fatal, medicine and poison, the 
mandrake that haunts Juliet’s imagination on the verge of her sleep suggests 
the suspended play of oppositions that her artificial sleep embodies.
       Just as Romeo’s false death is succeeded by Juliet’s false death, Juliet’s 
nightmarish intimations are followed by Romeo’s dream of his own death. “If 
I may trust the flattering truth  of sleep,” Romeo rather inauspiciously opens 
the final act,

       My  dreams presage some joyful news at hand. 
       My  bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne 
       And  all this day an unaccustom’d spirit
       Lifts  me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. 
       I  dreamt my lady came and found me dead—
       Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!—
       And  breath’d such life with kisses in my lips 
       That  I reviv’d and was an emperor. 
       Ah  me, how sweet is love itself possess’d 
       When  but love’s shadows are so rich in joy.                (5.1.1–11)

Romeo’s naive faith in “the  flattering  truth  of  sleep” continues his belief, 
expressed earlier to Mercutio, in a dream as a negative omen.20 This second 

45
36                                             Tanya Pollard

dream marks a curious half-truth; as Marjorie Garber points out,  it is true 
that he will die and that Juliet will  kiss him, although unfortunately he will 
not revive nor become an emperor.21 Romeo’s dream, like those Mercutio 
attributes to Queen Mab, seems to represent a wish rather than a true pre-
diction. Just as Juliet’s sleep is arranged to evade the catastrophe of having 
to marry  Paris, so Romeo’s sleep offers an escape from the doom he has 
envisioned, replacing the tragic ending of death with  the comic ending of 
an erotic consummation.
       Both  of the lovers’ sleeps, however, are only temporary; far from fulfill-
ing the positive transformation they promise, they eventually bring about that 
which they sought to avert. Juliet’s artificial death leads to its actuality. News 

“ of her death reaches Romeo through an unwittingly accurate euphemism: 
 Her  body sleeps in Capels’ monument” (5.1.18). In response, Romeo vows 
to enter the same figurative sleep, cast in erotic terms: “Well, Juliet, I will lie 
with thee tonight. /  Let’s see for means” (5.1.34–35). While the false report 
of Romeo’s death led to figurative and false poisons, and eventually to Juliet’s 
false death, Juliet’s more persuasive counterfeit of death leads to real poisons 
and Romeo’s real death, which will itself be reflected back in her own actual 
death. Dangerous potions here become the middle term in a mimetic  tri-
angle: pretense inspires the accessories that bring greater authenticity to the 
next imitation.
       The poisons Juliet invokes upon believing Romeo dead, as well as the 
pseudopoisons of her sleeping potion, become literal when Romeo believes 
her dead. Romeo’s encounter with the apothecary parallels Juliet’s visit to 
Friar Lawrence, but at an even higher pitch of desperation. Unlike the Friar, 
who volunteers his drugs, the apothecary sells his poisons under pressure and 
against his will, and whereas Juliet sought a temporary solution for temporal 
problems—exile, imposed marriage—Romeo seeks a final remedy for an ap-
parently permanent ending:

                                                                             Let  me have
       A  dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear 
       As will  disperse itself through all the veins, 
       That  the life-weary taker may fall dead,
       And  that the trunk may be discharg’d of breath 
       As violently as hasty powder fir’d
       Doth  hurry from  the fatal cannon’s womb.
                                                                                           (5.1.59–65)

Romeo’s odd assimilation of  poison to gunpowder  conveys an eroticized 
urgency, likening death to an  explosive sexual consummation. The figure 
closely recalls the  Friar’s early concern  over the  intensity  of  the lovers’ 

46
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        37

infatuation: “These violent delights have violent ends / And in their triumph 
die, like  fire  and powder, /  Which   as they kiss consume” (2.6.9–11). In 
evoking this earlier reference, Romeo’s words appropriate the scale and force 
of a cannon for his own humbler means of death; they also serve to identify 
his suicidal frenzy with the passion that spawned it.
       Romeo explicitly links death with marriage in his suicide, which he casts 
as a reunion with  Juliet. “Here’s to my  love,” he cries before drinking his 
poison; “O true  apothecary, / Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I  die” 
(5.3.119–120). As M. M. Mahood notes, these final lines embody their own 
paradox; the apothecary’s drugs are “quick” in the sense both of speedy and of 
life-giving, in that they return him to Juliet.22 Moments later a horrified Juliet 
echoes him both in action and in words:

       What’s here? A cup clos’d in my true love’s hand? 
       Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
       O  churl. Drunk  all, and left no friendly drop 
       To help me after? I will  kiss thy lips.
       Haply  some poison yet doth hang on them 
       To make me die with a restorative.                       (5.3.161–166) 23

Like Romeo’s “quick” drugs, Juliet’s hope to “die with  a restorative” high-
lights the paradoxical status of poisons and pseudopoisons throughout the 
play. The Friar’s mock poison is intended as a kind of love potion. Ultimate-
ly, though, it robs her of her love by bringing about his suicide. Similarly, the 
apothecary’s real poison purports to offer Romeo a reunion with his wife in 
death but prevents him from a reunion while still living.
       After  an uneasy rivalry between tragedy and farce for the soul of the play, 
tragedy suddenly, and rather surprisingly, wins, recalling the warning with 
which the Chorus opened the play. Yet despite, or perhaps because of, this ge-
neric resolution, these ultimately poisonous potions confer on the lovers what 
seemed out of their reach when alive: their star-crossed and convention-laden 
love acquires dignity, pathos, and immortality, even acknowledgment from 
their embattled parents. Poison is Romeo’s “timeless end” not only because (as 
editors tend to gloss the term) it is untimely, cutting him off unexpectedly in 
youth, but also because the ending it gives him places him outside and above 
time, into the space of legend.

                                                       * * *
Although Romeo and Juliet may offer the most famous dramatization of the 
confusion of narcotic with poison and of artificially induced sleep with death, 
the device recurs throughout contemporaneous plays. Barabas, in Marlowe’s 

47
38                                             Tanya Pollard

Jew of Malta, recounts employing such a potion to escape notice, and punish-
ment: “I  drank poppy and cold mandrake juice; /And  being asleep, belike 
they thought  me dead” (5.1.81–82). Similarly, the queen in  Shakespeare’s 
Cymbeline is foiled in her attempt to poison Imogen when it turns out that her 
doctor substituted a sleeping potion for a poison. In Edward Sharpham’s The 
Fleire, the Knight’s attempt to poison Sparke and Ruffel is later revealed as 
unsuccessful when they awaken; in John Day’s Law Tricks, the Counts Lurdo 
and Horatio  are surprised when Lurdo’s wife  reappears to confront them 
after apparently having been poisoned by them; and Don John in Dekker’s 
Match Me in London is similarly confronted with Don  Valasco’s survival of 
his poisoning. Throughout these generically unstable plays, as in Romeo and 
Juliet, the sleeping potion becomes a pivot on which the  play’s ambiguity 
turns: it suspends the plot, holding out the simultaneous possibilities of death 
and rebirth. The recurrence of the motif suggests that narcotics held a special 
appeal and metatheatrical significance for the drama: the sleep they induce 
parallels the suspension of time and identity produced by plays themselves.
       Playwrights’ interest in the ambivalent pleasures of sleeping potions was 
informed by radical shifts in  early modern pharmacy. Epidemics of plague 
and syphilis, combined with escalating interest in the chemical medicine of 
Paracelsus and other Continental scientists, led to a surge in the use of pow-
erful, though often toxic, remedies. Medical accounts of the seductive overlay 
of pleasure and danger associated with soporific drugs, in particular, offered 
a compelling vocabulary for a theatrical establishment fascinated by this jux-
taposition, especially in light of similar characterizations of the theater itself. 
Describing the increased use of opium during the plague, for example, Dr. 
Eleazer Dunk wrote in 1606 that  the drug “was very acceptable to patients 
for a while, for it stayed the violent flowing of the humors, it procured present 
“sleepe, and mitigated paine.”24 Yet its ultimate effect, he claimed, was death: 
 a great number had their  lives cut off;  some died sleeping, being stupied 
with that poisoned medicine.”25 Dunk’s dismay toward the growing popular-
ity of  an often fatal  drug was echoed throughout the medical community, 
which drew on opium’s dangers to emphasize a line of continuity between 
sleep and death. Bulleins Bulwarke of Defence (1579) claims of poppy that “it 
causeth deepe deadly sleapes.”26 Similarly, in 1580 the physician Timothy 
Bright warned that opium must be taken in very small doses, “least it cast the 
patient into such a sleepe, as hee needeth the trumpet of the Archangell to 
awake him.”27 Philip Barrough echoed, in 1596, that with these drugs, “you 
may cause him to sleepe so, that you can awake him no more.”28 And lastly, in 
1599 André Du Laurens wrote,

       in  the vse of all these stupefactiue medicines taken inwardly; wee 
       must take heed to deale with  very good aduise, for feare that in 

48
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        39

       stead of desiring to procure rest vnto the sillie melancholie wretch, 
       wee cast him into an endless sleepe.29

The  recurring   medical  pronouncements on  this  topic   both  testify   to 
anxieties about the use (and overuse) of narcotic drugs and emphasize the 
perceived fragility of  the  boundary between ordinary sleep and the  end-
less deep of death. Once the patient falls asleep, they suggest, the force of 
inertia, if given any assistance, will keep him that way. Shakespeare, whose 
son-in-law John Hall was a prominent physician, could hardly help but  be 
aware of these concems.30 In the context of these portraits of sleeping drugs, 
Juliet’s decline from slumber into death seems an inevitable response to Friar 
Lawrence’s would-be remedy.
       As  the emphasis on the link  between sleep and death suggests, fears 
about artificial sleeping drugs drew on concerns not only about pharmacy, but 
about sleep itself, widely seen as a near relation to death.31 Medical accounts 
of sleep refer to its capacity for enervation as well as restoration; Du Laurens 
describes it as “the withdrawing of the spirits and naturall  heate, from the 
outward parts, to the inward, and from all the circumference vnto the cen-
ter.”32 Paré expands on this definition, depicting sleep as

       the rest of the whole body, and the cessation of the Animall facultie 
       from  sense and motion. Sleepe is caused, when the substance of 
       the brain is possessed, and after some sort overcome and dulled by 
       a certaine vaporous, sweete and delightsome humidity; or when 
       the spirits almost exhaust by performance of some labour, cannot 
       any longer sustaine the weight of the body.33

Paré’s description, like that of Du  Laurens, portrays sleep as a temporary 
death, a cessation from sense and motion. The mind slips into suspension—
possessed, overcome, and dulled, losing any possibility of control—while 
simultaneously the spirits lack the strength to sustain the body. In fact, the 
medical disorder of excessive sleep is explicitly linked with the idea of death; 
Barroughs lists a lengthy catalog of sleep disorders that, somewhat monoto-
nously, all come to be equated with death.34 Like soporific drugs, sleep is 
understood as containing both medicinal and poisonous potential.
       The representation of sleep in the theater shares these doctors’ emphasis 
on the proximity  of sleep and death and the fragility  of the  boundary be-
tween them. David Bevington notes that both characters and audiences have 
difficulties at times distinguishing between the two  states.35 In A Midsum-
mer Night’s Dream, Helena wonders, upon seeing Lysander spread out on 
the ground, “Dead, or asleep?” (2.2.101); later, in a mock-tragic mirror image 
of this scene, which arguably parodies Romeo and Juliet, Thisbe interrogates 

49
40                                             Tanya Pollard

Pyramus’s body, “Asleep, my love? / What, dead, my dove?” (5.1.324–325). 
This confusion, which can be seen in countless other dramatic examples,36 
highlights a metatheatrical resonance: in the suspended reality of the stage, 

“ all deaths are feigned, as are all sleeps, living out Lady Macbeth’s maxim that 
 The sleeping and the dead / Are but as pictures”(2.2.50–51). Shakespeare’s 
recurring trope of  the  play as a dream, staged while the audience sleeps, 
suggests that images of sleepers onstage can be understood to reflect the un-
certain status of the play’s spectators as well.37
       In  the light  of medical accounts of sleep and sleeping drinks, the com-
parison is a dangerous one. In the theater as well, sleep is not only similar to 
death but susceptible to it. Just as Juliet’s deep sleep unwittingly catalyzes both 
her own death and Romeo’s, sleeping in plays often proves fatal. Recounting 
his “foul murder” to his son, the ghost of King Hamlet repeatedly dwells on 
his oblivion to the murderer: “sleeping in my orchard, / A serpent stung me”; 
“Sleeping within my orchard, / My  custom always of the afternoon, / Upon 

/ my secure hour thy uncle stole”; “Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand 
  Of  life, of  crown, of queen once dispatch’d” (1.5.35–36; 59–61; 74–75).38 
Lady Macbeth facilitates the murder of the sleeping Duncan by making the 
guards sleep soundly: “I have drugg’d their possets / That death and nature do 
contend about them, / Whether they live or die” (2.2.6–8).39 Even in the safer 
contexts of comedy or romance, sleeping is risky: in The Taming of the Shrew, 
Christopher Sly is tricked into a new identity  after succumbing to drunken 
oblivion; the sleeping lovers in A Midsummer Night’s Dream are medicined 
with troublemaking love potions; and Caliban schemes to murder Prospero 
while he sleeps. If sleep can be a figure for the world of the play, theatergoers 
are, by analogy, depicted as being at risk when they surrender themselves to 
it. The vulnerability associated with the passivity of sleep may be implicitly 
identified with the position of the spectator.
       Renaissance antitheatricalists drew precisely this comparison, identifying 
 the suspended quality of theatrical performances with sleep and its concor-
dant threatening associations of pleasure, sin, and death. “Stage-haunters are 
for the most part lulled asleepe in the Dalilaes lappe of these sinfull pleasures,” 
William  Prynne writes, “yea they are quite dead in sinnes and trespasses.”40 
The biblical reference offers a resonant image of both the seductive tempta-
tion and the  catastrophic results of surrender to sleep. Accordingly, just as 
medical writers insist on the necessity of moderating both sleep and intake of 
soporific drugs, Prynne suggests that exposure to the theater must be limited 
in order to avoid dangerous consequences:

       the recreation must not be overlong, not time-consuming; it must be 
       onely as a baite to a traviler, a whetting to a Mower or Carpenter, or 
       as an houres sleepe in the day time to a wearied man; we must not 

50
                       “A Thing  Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons                  41

        spend whole weekes; whole dayes, halfe dayes or nights on recreations as 
        now  too  many  doe, abundance of idlenesse in this kinde, being one of 
        Sodomes hainous sinnes.41

Prynne  distinguishes    between  the  potentially    reviving    capacity  of  a  brief 
rest and  the  danger   of  excessively long  leisure.  For  other   moralizing    crit-
ics, however,  exposure to  the  theater  operates on a continuum,    defying  safe 
containment   in small  quantities.   Stephen  Gosson  invokes a model  of  incre-
mental  gradations  to illustrate   the  contagious force  of the  theater,  which,  he 
writes,  takes  the  audience “from    pyping  to  playing,   from   play to  pleasure, 
from  pleasure  to  slouth,  from   slouth  to  sleepe, from   sleepe to  sinne,  from 
sinne to  death, from   death to  the  Divel.”42
        If  the  stage lulls its  spectators into  the  deathlike  state of  excessive sleep, 
the theater  itself  can be seen as a sleep-inducing drug.  Prynne  explicitly   links 
theatrical  idleness  with  toxic  potions.  “Such  prevalency  is there  in  these be-
witching   Stage-playes,”  he writes,  “to  draw  men  on  to  sloth, to idlenesse, the 
very bane, the poyson, and destruction of mens peerelesse soules” (506). Stage plays, 
according  to his  model,  parallel  the  function   of drugs  in  drawing   spectators 
to sloth,  a poisonous state. The transformation    effected in  spectators by  plays 
claims the  potency  of a permanent,  and  fatal, chemical  reaction  and suggests 
that  the  ambiguous  status  of  the  sleeping  potion   onstage  could  ultimately 
reflect the  impact,  as well as the form,  of  the play that  features  it.

                                                             * * *
In  the  world  of  the  theater,  the  ambivalent   interweaving   of  sleep, potions, 
poisons, and plays is  perhaps most fully   dramatized   in Antony  and Cleopatra. 
Just as it revisits  the structural   pattern   of Romeo and Juliet, the  play explores 
a similar   confusion    between  sleeping  potions   and  poisons.43 Throughout 
the  play,  Cleopatra   and  Egypt    are  associated with    pleasurable  narcotics, 
both  figurative   and  literal.  Rooted   in Rome  and  the  apparent  genre of  his-
tory, Antony   wavers between  grasping  at comedy—in   which  the  languorous 
hedonism  of  Cleopatra’s   world  brings   pleasure  and  ultimately   marriage—
and  tumbling    into  tragedy,   where  sinister   charms  mesmerize   him   into   a 
sleepy incapacitation   and  ultimately   death.  By  the  end of  the  play,  Egypt’s 
ambiguous  sleepy drugs,  like   Friar  Lawrence’s  potion,   prove  officially   poi-
sonous, killing    the  protagonists   and  defining   the   play as  a tragedy.  As  in 
Romeo and Juliet, however, the evolution  of  soporifics  into  poisons ultimately 
serves to rescue the lovers rather  than  to  destroy them.   Antony’s  death  gives 
rise to Cleopatra’s  imaginative   production   of  a more heroic  Antony,   and her 
own  suicide elevates her  theatrical   power, which   often  provoked  skepticism 
and suspicion  while   she lived,  to  the  realm  of myth.   Although    the  raucous 

51
42                                             Tanya Pollard

comedy of Cleopatra’s Egypt evolves steadily into tragedy, the play closes on 
a note of triumph.
       Despite the play’s parallels with Romeo and Juliet, however, there are im-
portant changes. The lovers’ roles are redistributed: as the entranced consumer 
of dreams, spectacles, sleeping potions, and poisons, Antony plays both Ro-
meo and Juliet, whereas Cleopatra, like Friar Lawrence and the apothecary, 
is more source than recipient of the play’s intoxicating potions. She occupies, 
moreover, the center of the play’s explicit meditations on dramatic spectacles. 
Accordingly, the play is significantly more self-conscious than Romeo and Ju-
liet in its examination of drugs and their relationship with the theater, and its 
closing celebration of the lovers is both more problematic and more telling.
       In  the play’s opening act, Cleopatra echoes Juliet by seeking refuge from 
her lover’s absence in sleep-inducing potions. “Give me to drink  mandra- 

/ gora,” she orders Charmian, “That I might sleep out this great gap of time 
  My  Antony is away” (1.5.4–6). Cleopatra’s choice of sleeping potion links 
her with Juliet, identifying Cleopatra’s daydreams with the nightmare vision 
of Juliet’s mandrake-surrounded tomb. Yet mandragora, with its ambiguous 
conflation of sleeping potion, aphrodisiac, and poison, is here presented as a 
remedy to the unsettling emptiness created by Antony’s departure, becoming 
a replacement or double for Antony himself. The sleep it offers suggests both 
an erotically pleasurable idleness and a deathlike retreat, which suspends time 
during Antony’s absence.
       Despite her call for  mandragora, however, Cleopatra medicines herself 
with daydreams rather than drugs. Distracting herself from her distress, she 
luxuriates in pleasurable fantasies:

                                                                             O  Charmian,
       Where think’st thou  he is now? Stands he, or sits he? 
       Or  does he walk? or is he on his horse?
       O  happy horse to bear the weight of Antony!
       Do  bravely, horse, for wot’st thou whom thou mov’st 
       The  demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
       And  burgonet of men. He’s speaking now,
       Or  murmuring, “Where’s my serpent of old Nile?”
       For so he calls me. Now I feed myself
       With   most delicious poison. 
                                                                                        (1.5.18–27)44

Cleopatra represents the absent Antony in her  own internal  theater, fill-
ing the empty horizon with  a catalog of his imagined places, postures, and 
thoughts. Neatly inverting  her own lack, she scripts him as looking for an 
absent Cleopatra. With its  erotic charge and comforting  reversal of roles, 

52
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        43

the private  theater of  her  daydreams serves a pharmaceutical function, 
constructing  the  sleepy oblivion  she  craves. Her  remedy, though,   has 
ambiguous effects: she describes her reveries as “most delicious poison,” 
linking  her escapist pleasures with corrosive perils. Cleopatra is simulta-
neously patient and pharmacist, consumer and producer of the drugs she 
craves. Her request for the sleepy aphrodisiac poison of the  mandrake is 
answered in her erotic fantasies.
       Although  in  this scene Cleopatra is drugged by her own sleepy rever-
ies, throughout the play it is primarily Antony and his Roman soldiers who 
consume the pleasurable but poisonous soporifics associated with Egypt and 
its queen. Just as she herself confines fantasy with narcotic drugs, so the Ro-
mans are seduced by a combination of Cleopatra’s dramatic spectacles and 
her wine-seeped feasts, underlining the parallel between theatricality and 
sleepy potions.45 Enobarbus’s tales of Egyptian extravagance are laced with 
references to drunken somnolence. “We did sleep day out of countenance,” he 
vaunts to Maecenas and Agrippa, just before describing Cleopatra’s perfor-
mance at Cydnus, “and made the night light with drinking”  (2.2.177–178). 
Scenes of drinking seem inevitably to conjure up Egypt,  theatricality, and 
oblivion: after negotiations with  Pompey, Caesar, and Lepidus, Enobarbus 
asks Antony, “Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals / And celebrate 

“ our drink?” (2.7.101–102). “Come, let’s all take hands,” Antony responds, 
 Till  that  the conquering wine hath steeped our sense / In soft and delicate 
Lethe” (2.7.104–106).
       Although  Enobarbus describes Egypt’s alcoholic and theatrical revels 
in festive terms, Antony’s allusion to Lethe, the river of forgetfulness, points 
to darker aspects of the surrender of consciousness that they represent. Som-
nolence, and the potions that produce it, threatens not only to suspend the 
self but to dissolve it.46 Antony’s dependence on the sleepy calm brought on 
by drink  becomes more desperate as the play progresses. Wine allays ten-
sions with Cleopatra: amid their  post-Actium  reconciliation, Antony calls, 
“Some wine within  there, and our viands!” (3.11.73). Later, after forgiving 
Cleopatra’s conference with Caesar’s deputy Thidias, he calls for “one other 
gaudy night . . .  Fill  our bowls once more” (3.13.183–184). Just as Juliet’s 
sleeping potion held out the promise of reuniting her with Romeo, the sleepy 
potions of wine offer  to bring  Antony back to  Cleopatra and the comedic 
goal of marital bliss. While Juliet and Romeo each drink only a single draft 
of their respective potions, however, Antony’s self-medication is ongoing and 
apparently insatiable. Rather than killing at once, his soporifics draw him into 
a self-perpetuating addiction that slowly and gradually destroys him.
       From  a Roman perspective, Antony’s constant consumption of sleep-
inducing drink  signals his broader surrender to the  dangerously seductive 

53
44                                             Tanya Pollard

charm of Egypt. “Let  witchcraft  join with  beauty, lust with both,” Pompey 
exults to Menocrates,

       Tie  up the libertine, in a field of feasts,
       Keep his brain fuming;  Epicurean cooks
       Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
       That  sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour, 
       Even till  a Lethe’d dullness—                                    (2.1.22–27)

Antony’s surrender to sleep, according to Pompey, suggests he is victim to 
a form of witchcraft:  he is lured  into oblivion,  a “Lethe’d dullness,” by an 
inexorable assault on his appetites. Antony becomes an object rather than 
a subject, tied  up,  fumed,  and, most  important,  prorogued:  suspended, 
deferred, kept in abeyance.47
       Cleopatra and her performances are at the center of this luxurious but 
unsettling languor: in response to her faltering attempts to delay his depar-
ture for Rome, Antony chides, “But that your royalty /  Holds idleness your 
subject, I should take you / For idleness itself ” (1.3.91–93). The paradoxical 
structure of his assertion captures an essential aspect of Cleopatra’s nature: 
she seems simultaneously to embody somnolence and to control it, both to be 
implicated in an Egyptian passivity and to manipulate it, actively, for her own 
gains. The soporific drug for which she calls is both a potion at her disposal 
and an emblem of her own effect on others.
       As Antony’s response to this scene of Cleopatra’s suggests, his consump-
tion of Egypt’s soporific food and drink  is paralleled with his spectatorship 
of Cleopatra’s performances. Cleopatra’s primary power lies in her ability to 
draw all eyes to her: describing her spectacular arrival at Cydnus, Enobar-

“ bus claims that the city’s rush to view her on the barge left behind only air, 
 which, but for  vacancy / Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too, / And made 
a gap in nature” (2.2.216–218). Antony is hardly immune to  her magnetic 
pull: in a disconcerting reversal of roles, she turns down his dinner invitation 
to insist that he come to her, where he “for his ordinary, pays his heart, / For 
what his eyes eat only” (2.2.225–226). Visual consumption is equated with, 
and substituted for, oral and is in both cases costly.
       This pattern, of gazing on Cleopatra and subsequently losing himself, is 
repeated at Actium. Upon seeing Cleopatra withdraw from the battle, An- 
tony “(like a doting  mallard) / Leaving the  fight in  heighth, flies after her” 
(3.10.20–21). His will is no longer his own: “My heart was to thy rudder tied 
by the strings,” he tells Cleopatra (3.11.57). The scene depicts the culmina-

“ tion of a process that began at Cydnus, the dissolution of his autonomous self. 
 I never saw an action of such shame,” Scarus tells Enobarbus; “Experience, 

54
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        45

manhood, honour, ne’er before / Did violate so itself ” (3.10.23–24). Antony’s 
surrender to Cleopatra’s spectacles parallels, and extends, his surrender to the 
oblivion of drink  and sleep, implicitly suggesting that spectators of the play 
(who also, of course, gaze on Cleopatra) share, at least temporarily, the loss of 
self the play dramatizes.48
       This surrender, the play insists, is dangerous. Despite his enchantment 
with Cleopatra, Antony himself links her narcotic pleasures with the threat of 
poison. Early in the play, he worries that “Much is breeding, / Which like the 
courser’s hair, hath yet but life / And not a serpent’s poison” (1.2.190–192). 
While he holds back from attributing poison to the magically animated hair, 
his choice of image and cautionary “yet” imply  that  it  is only a matter  of 
time. Shortly after this, he echoes Pompey’s skeptical account of his Egyp-
tian subjection by apologizing to Caesar that “poisoned hours had bound me 
up /  From mine own  knowledge” (2.2.90). Even Cleopatra echoes the as-
sociation, identifying herself as Antony’s “serpent of old Nile” (1.5.25). These 
foreshadowings of the poison that will later bring about the play’s tragic end 
offer a physical correlative for the corrosion of Antony’s will; they remind the 
audience from early on that the bawdy jests and playful banter of Cleopatra’s 
court are not without troubling side effects.
       The idea of Cleopatra’s seductive appeal as a type of poison was explic-
itly encoded in Shakespeare’s sources. North’s translation of Plutarch’s Life 
of Marc Antonie describes Antony’s falling off from  martial  greatness as a 
kind of poisoning: Antony  was “so rauished & enchaunted with the sweete 
poyson of her love, that he had no other thought but of her, & how he might 
quickly returne againe . . .”49 Later he writes similarly that Caesar claimed 
“that Antonius was not Maister of him selfe, but that Cleopatra had brought 
him beside him selfe, by her charmes and amorous poysons.”50 North’s “sweet 
poyson” and “amorous poysons” stem in both cases from Plutarch’s “pharma-
koi,” evoking, like Cleopatra’s mandrake, an ambiguous array of meanings: 
poison, remedy, drug, and aphrodisiac.51 The embedded presence of North’s 
language and its attendant ambiguities can be seen in the play’s recurring 
imagery of poison, and particularly in its emphasis on the literal poison with 
which Cleopatra kills herself.
       As in  Romeo and Juliet, the play’s closing suggests that its near poisons, 
or figurative poisons, metamorphose into literal and fatal poisons, that Lethe 
becomes lethal. The play’s oscillations between farce and fear settle formally 
into tragedy as its ambiguous potions become firmly defined. Shakespeare 
presents the long, slow drama of the lovers’ deaths as beginning after the 

“ final lost battle, with Antony’s rage at his perceived betrayal by Cleopatra. 
 The shirt of Nessus is upon me,” he laments; “teach me, / Alcides, thou mine 
ancestor, thy rage” (4.12.43–45). Antony’s reference to the shirt of Nessus is 
the last, and least heroic, of the allusions that throughout the play link him 

55
46                                             Tanya Pollard

with Hercules.52 Referring to the poisoned shirt with which Hercules’ wife 
Deianeira brought about his death, the allusion suggests that Antony’s death 
is already under way, brought about by Cleopatra’s poisonous treachery.53
       Antony’s claim that he is dying of Cleopatra’s poisons proves quickly, if 
indirectly, to be true. Alarmed by his accusations and threats, Cleopatra imi-
tates Juliet in feigning death. Like Juliet, Cleopatra does not conceive of the 
idea independently; in response to her plea, “Help me, my women!” (4.13.1), 
Charmian suggests that she lock herself in her monument and send word to 
Antony that she is dead. Unlike Juliet, however, Cleopatra seems to be aware 
that her ruse will hurt her lover, even that it may bring about his death. Dio-
medes announces to the dying Antony that his mistress “had a prophesying 
fear / Of what hath come to pass,” and that she has sent him, “fearing since 
how it [her ruse] might work” (4.14.120–121, 125).54 Cleopatra, in fact, seems 
more certain than fearful; when Diomedes returns from bearing the message, 
she immediately inquires, “How now? is he dead?” (4.15.6). Just as Juliet’s 
imitation  of  death mimetically  re-created itself  in  Romeo’s actual death, 
Cleopatra’s staging immediately brings about Antony’s suicide. While Juliet’s 
death was undertaken with reassurances that Romeo would be warned, how-
ever, Cleopatra’s relies for its efficacy precisely on Antony believing it true. 
Cleopatra’s theatrical imagination, the metaphorical mandragora that she fed 
herself in act 1, ultimately acts as a poison that brings about Antony’s death.
       Fittingly,  Cleopatra’s performance of death leads Antony to a death en-
visioned as a long-awaited slumber. “Unarm, Eros,” he responds, “the long 
day’s task is done, / And we must sleep” (4.14.35–36). Death offers Antony 
a purer version of the  escapist oblivion he has courted in Egypt;  like  the 
drunken revels, it imitates and intensifies, it also seems to promise a return 
to Cleopatra, and erotic union. “I will  be /  A bridegroom in  my death,” he 
pronounces, “and run into’t / As to a lovers bed” (4.14.99–101). Like Romeo, 
he fuses together tragedy and comedy by identifying the defeat of death with 
the triumph of marriage.
       Just as Antony’s temporary disappearance to Rome became the occasion 
for Cleopatra’s dreamlike reveries and calls for mandragora, his permanent 
disappearance to death brings on a literal dream, leading her to call again for 
both sleep and poison. “I dreamt there was an Emperor Antony,” Cleopatra 
tells Dolabella. “O such another sleep, that I might see / But such another 
man!” (5.2.76–78). Cleopatra’s resurrection of an “Emperor Antony” can be 
seen as the belated fulfillment of Romeo’s dream “that I reviv’d, and was an 
emperor” (4.1.9). Although the narcotic enchantment of her theatrical spec-
tacles worked to undo the literal Antony, the same soporific imagination offers 
recompense by reconstituting his image in fantasy.
       Having  brought  about Antony’s  death and resurrection through  the 
force of her  theatrical imagination, Cleopatra sets about attending to  her 

56
                     “A Thing Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons        47

own. The play seems to begin anew, as she stages a reproduction of the 
spectacle that started her romance: “I am again for Cydnus,” she tells her 
women, “To meet Mark Antony”  (5.2.227–228). In an ironic juxtaposition 
of genres, the asp that literalizes the play’s figurative poisons is conveyed 
by an emblem of comedy: a clown. “What poor an instrument,” Cleopatra 
comments, “May do  a noble deed!” (5.2.235–236). As  the  carrier of  the 
poisons that will  fulfill  Cleopatra’s tragic final scene, the clown’s presence 
implicitly  suggests that the play’s earlier scenes, with their bawdiness and 
farce, were a necessary vehicle for what would follow: her playfully ambig-
uous mandragora has evolved into literal poisons with final and permanent 
effects.
       Like  Antony, and Romeo and Juliet before him, Cleopatra paradoxically 
looks to dying as revivification and reunion: “I have / Immortal longings in 
me,” she pronounces; “Husband, I come, / Now to that name, my courage 
prove my title!” (5.2.279–280, 286–287). Watching Iras die after a farewell 
kiss, Cleopatra again conflates poison with pain-alleviating, and even seduc-
tive, pleasures:

       Have I  the aspic in my lips? Dost fall? 
       If  thou and nature can so gently part,
       The  stroke of death is as a lover’s pinch, 
       Which  hurts, and is desir’d.                                   (5.2.292–295)

Cleopatra’s attribution of erotic pleasure to death draws on the play’s fre-
quent punning on dying as orgasm. In fact, the speed of Iras’s death evokes 

“ sexual jealousy: “If she first meet the curled Antony,” Cleopatra worries, 
 He’ll  make demand of her, and spend that kiss / Which  is my  heaven to 
have” (5.2.300–302). Death, as she conceives it, will return her to Antony 
and erotic fulfillment.  By staging her suicide as a marriage, Cleopatra con-
founds generic rules: although the play ends as a tragedy, it also stages the 
traditionally comic celebration of a wedding and new life. 
       Shakespeare’s detailed description of Cleopatra’s death represents an 
imaginative interpolation from his source. Plutarch refers to the idea of the 
asp conveyed in a basket of figs as only one of a number of possible manners 
of Cleopatra’s death.55 In contrast to Shakespeare’s dramatization of the con-
veyance and biting of the asp, Plutarch insists that we will never know exactly 
how she died. He emphasizes, however, her ingenuity and preparations in 
researching her means of death. In a particularly intriguing passage, Plutarch 
relates that, since early in the troubles with Rome, Cleopatra had been experi-
menting with the effects of various poisons on condemned prisoners in order 
to find the most painless form of death:

57
48                                             Tanya Pollard

       So when she had dayly made diuers and sundrie proofes, she found 
       none of all them she had proued so fit, as the biting of an Aspicke, 
       the which  only causeth a hauines of the head, without swounding 
       or  complaining, and bringeth  a great desire also to sleepe, with 
       a little  swet in  the face, and so by litle and litle  taketh away the 
       sences and vitall powers, no liuing   creature perceiuing that the 
       pacients feele any paine. For  they are so sorie when any bodie 
       waketh them,  and taketh them up: as those that being taken out 
       of a sound sleepe, are very heauy and desirous to sleepe.56

Cleopatra’s means of suicide, then, was chosen particularly for its resemblance 
to a sleeping potion;  her death can be seen as a carefully choreographed 
extension of her earlier soporific pleasures.
       Shakespeare essentially omits this striking anecdote from his play, limit-
ing its mention to  an afterthought by Caesar that “her physician tells me / 
She hath pursued conclusions infinite / Of easy ways to die” (5.2.352–354). 
Its residual echoes, however, can be seen not only in the play’s recurring refer-
ences to narcotics but in Shakespeare’s association of Cleopatra’s death with 
the peace and pleasure of sleep. “O for such another sleep,” she muses af-
ter her dream of Mark Antony, “that  I might  see / But such another man!” 
(5.2.77–78). And the play suggests that her desire for sleep is granted. “Peace, 
peace,” she bids Charmian, as she hovers on the brink of dying, “Dost thou 
not see my baby at my breast, / That sucks the nurse asleep?” (5.2.307–309). 
Poison, ultimately, is her sleeping potion: upon viewing her dead body, Caesar 
eulogizes that “she looks like sleep, / As she would catch another Antony / In 
her strong toil of grace” (5.2.344–346). In her death, Cleopatra captures that 
aspect of sleep which differentiates it from death and gives it the  pleasure 
of comedy: its promise of waking. The images of renewal—the baby at her 
breast, another Cydnus, the catching of another Antony—suggest that her 
play is suspended rather than over.

                                                       * * *
Antony and Cleopatra, like Romeo and Juliet before them, find a monument 
in death: “She shall be buried by her Antony,” Caesar specifies; “No grave 
upon the earth shall clip  in it  / A  pair so famous” (5.2.356–358). As their 
monuments suggest, both plays end on a note of awe. Despite the ambiguous 
interferences of comedy and farce, with their ongoing threat of ridicule, the 
deaths with which the plays close confer a measure of dignity on not only 
the lovers but  the plays themselves. The intermediate,  uncertain generic 
mode of the sleeping potion settles into the poison of tragedy, but even this 
poison turns out to be ambiguous in function. While it takes away the lovers’ 

58
                       “A Thing  Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons                  49

lives, it  also gives them  back their  marriage,  leaving  doubt  as to the  ultimate 
nature  of the  ending.
        Despite  the  uncannily  similar  patterns  these plays follow, the  differences 
between them   are significant.   Youthful   and  star-crossed,  Romeo  and  Juliet 
prove almost  accidental  consumers of  the ambiguous  and  disturbing   potions 
that pervade their  play. Their  uncertain  drugs guide  their  oscillations  between 
comedy and  tragedy,  but  the  parallelism  the  play  establishes between  types 
of plays  and types  of potions   offers only   tentative  implications   as to  its  sig-
nificance. Cleopatra,  on  the other  hand,  is the font  of  her play’s poisons.  Her 
dreamlike  imagination    and  dramatic   performances  are  explicitly   identified 
with  the  potions   that  pervade the  play, and  she exerts  an intoxicating,    nar-
cotic effect  on all  of her  audiences, including   Antony  and,  ultimately,  herself. 
Antony,  accordingly,  offers  a  model  for   the  spectator  as consumer  of  dan-
gerous remedies:  mesmerized,  ensnared,  undone,  even annihilated,   but—in 
the end—triumphantly     reborn  in  the  imagination.   By  identifying    the  play’s 
ambivalent  potions   with  dramatic   spectacles, Shakespeare suggests that  the 
dangerous seduction  of  enchanting   potions  is akin  to  that  of  the  theater  it-
self; he  presents a complex  and  sophisticated   model  of  theatrical   agency as 
seeping into  audiences and  transforming   them  with  a chemical  force.  Going 
beyond a simple  revisitation   of the  earlier  play, Antony and Cleopatra exploits 
and advances the  juxtapositions   set up in  Romeo and Juliet,  transforming   its 
insights  about  the  ambivalence  of narcotic   potions  into  a broader  reflection 
on the suspended  reality  of the  theater.

                                                         Notes

         For reading and commenting on versions of this essay, I would like to thank 
David Quint, Jennifer Lewin, Raphael Falco, Katharine Craik, Will  Stenhouse, and 
members of the inter-disciplinary works-in-progress group at Macalester College. I 
would also like to thank the Wellcome Institute  for Medical  History,  the Warburg 
Institute, and the Folger Shakespeare Library for support with research.
         1. I  use the term “double tragedy” to refer to tragedies with two protagonists 
of equal stature, both named in  the title.  The  term could  also, however, describe 
the many other  forms of  generic and thematic  doubleness encompassed in these 
particular plays. On the rise of love tragedy in this period,  and its intrinsic generic 
complications, see especially Martha   Tuck  Rozett,  “The   Comic  Structures  of 
Tragic Endings: The Suicide Scenes in Romeo and Juliet and Antony and Cleopatra,” 
Shakespeare Quarterly 36:1 (1985): 152–164; and Charles Forker, “The Love-Death 
Nexus in English Renaissance Tragedy,” in Skull Beneath the Skin: The Achievement 
of John Webster (Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press, 
1986), 235–253. As Rozett observes, the genre was new in the 1590s, and Romeo 
and Juliet seems to have been the first English play in which love was the subject of 
tragedy (152).
         2. On  the mixing  of genres in Romeo and Juliet, see especially Susan Snyder, 
The Comic Matrix of Shakespeare’s Tragedies (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 

59
50                                                  Tanya Pollard

Press, 1979), 56–70. On Antony and Cleopatra, see Janet Adelman, The Common 
Liar: An Essay on Antony and Cleopatra (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 
1973), esp. 1–52; J. L. Simmons, “The  Comic  Pattern and  Vision in  Antony and 

“ Cleopatra,” English Literary History 36 (1969): 493–510; and Barbara C. Vincent, 
 Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra and the Rise of Comedy,”  English Literary 
Renaissance 12:1 (1982): 53–86. Rozett treats the two plays together  in  “Comic 
Structures of Tragic Endings.”
           3.  Jacques Derrida  offers  a provocative  account of  the  complexities  of 
the  term  pharmakon and its  relationship  to   writing   in  “Plato’s  Pharmacy,” in 
Dissemination, trans. Barbara Johnson (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), 
63–171. “There is no  such thing  as a harmless remedy,” he asserts, ref lecting on 
Plato’s uneasiness with the word’s irreducible ambiguity; “The pharmakon can never 
be simply beneficial” (99).

(          4. Anthony Munday, A second and third blast of retrait from plaies and Theaters 
 London, 1580), 101.
           5. William    Prynne,  Histriomastix:  The  Player’s Scourge (London, 1633), 
467, 38.
           6.  Thomas  Lodge,  A Defence of Poetry, Music and Stage-Plays (London, 
1579), 5.
           7. On genre, see Snyder, Comic Matrix. Much has been written on the play’s 
yoking  of love  and death;  see, for example, Marilyn    Williamson,  “Romeo  and 
Death,” Shakespeare Studies 14 (1981): 129–137; and Lloyd Davis, “‘Death-marked 
love’: Desire  and Presence in  Romeo and Juliet,” Shakespeare Survey 49 (1996): 
57–67.
           8. All   references to Romeo and Juliet are from the Arden edition, edited by 
Brian Gibbons (London: Methuen,  1980).
           9. Snyder comments on the play’s emphasis on extreme youth; see “Ideology 
and the Feud in Romeo and Juliet,” Shakespeare Survey 46 (1998): 87–88.
         10.  Paracelsus, Selected Writings, vol. 1, ed. Jolande Jacobi, trans. Norbert 
Guterman (New York: Pantheon, 1958), 107.
         11. See, for example, Andrew Wear, “Epistemology and Learned Medicine in 
Early Modern England,” in  Knowledge and the Scholarly Medical Traditions, ed. Don 
Bates (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 151–173.
         12. On  Paracelsus, see especially Walter Pagel, Paracelsus: An Introduction to 
Philosophical Medicine in the Era of the Renaissance (Basel: Karger, 1958), Charles 

( Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton: Magic and the Making of  Modern  Science 
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982); and Henry Pachter, Paracelsus: An 
Introduction to Philosophical Medicine in the Era of Guterman (New York: Pantheon, 
1958). On  the  impact of  Paracelsus in England,  see Allen   Debus, The English 
Parascelsans (London: Oldbourne, 1965); and Paul Kocher, “Paracelsan Medicine in 
England,” Journal of the History of Medicine 2 (1947): 451–480. Jonathan Gil Harris 
offers a suggestive analysis of the relationship between Paracelsan conceptions of 

( pharmacy and early modern political models in Foreign Bodies and The Body Politic 
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
         13. The ambivalent comedy of the nurse’s response is echoed by the musicians’ 
banter after Juliet’s apparent death; both  scenes are replayed, more darkly, with 
Balthasar’s false report of Juliet’s death to Romeo at the beginning of act 5.

( 14.        “I  saw the wound, I saw it  with  mine eyes . . . I  swounded at the sight” 
 3.2.52–56).

60
                       “A Thing  Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons                  51

         15. The Friar similarly tells the families, at the end of the play, that his sleeping 
potion achieved his intended aim in giving her “the form of death” (5.3.246).
         16 Snyder points  out  that  the reputed deaths of  Hero  in  Much Ado About 
Nothing, Helena in All’s Well That Ends Well, Claudio in Measure for Measure, and 
Hermoine in  A Winter’s Tale all succeed in their goal to avert or resolve a conflict 
by effecting a transformation in  other characters (Snyder, Comic Matrix, 67). The 
generic ambivalence in each of these plays could  be seen to identify   them with 
tragicomedy, where the same motif is prevalent; see, for example, Philaster, King and 
No King, and Match Me in London. On  characteristics and motifs of tragicomedy, 
see, for example, Gordon McMullen and Jonathan Hope, The Politics of Tragicomedy: 
Shakespeare and After (London and New York: Routledge, 1992), and Marvin  T. 

( Herrick, Tragicomedy: Its Origins and Development in Italy, France, and England 
 Urbana: University of Illinois  Press, 1955).
         17. On the range of associations with mandragora, see C. J. S. Thompson, The 
Mystic Mandrake (London: Rider  and Co., 1934). Other  noted literary  references 
to mandrake in the  period include John Donne’s poems “Song” (“Go, and catch a 
falling  star”) and “Twicknam  Gardens,” as well as Webster’s The Duchess of Malfi, 
in which Ferdinand describes his discovery of his sister’s marriage as having “digg’d 
up a mandrake” (2.5.1).
         18. On its soporific  powers, Ambroise Paré writes, “Mandrage taken in great 
quantity, either the root or fruit  causeth great sleepinesse, sadnesse, resolution, and 
languishing of the body, so that after many scritches and gripings, the patient falls 
asleep in the same posture as hee was in, just as if hee were in a Lethargie” (The 
Workes of that famous Chirurgion Ambroise Parey, trans. Thomas Johnson [London, 
1634], 806) William  Bullein remarks that it  is “properly geuen to helpe conception, 
some say, as it appeereth by the Wyues of the holy Patryarche Iacob, The one was 
fruictful,  the other did desire help, by the meanes of Mandracke, brought out of the 
fyeldes, by the handes of Ruben Leas sonne” (Bulleins Bulwarke of Defence against All 
Sicknesse, Soarenesse, and Woundes that doe dayly assuaulte mankinde [London, 1579], 
41v–42).
         19. Bullein  writes, “Many  . . .  doe affyrme, that  this herbe commeth of the 
seede of some conuicted dead men,” and goes on to describe “the terrible  shriek 
and cry of thys Mandrack. In which  cry, it Doth  not only dye it  selfe, but the feare 
thereof kylleth the Dogge or Beast, whych pulled it out of the earth. And this hearbe 
is called also  Anthropomorphos because it beareth the Image of a man” (Bulleins 
Bulwarke, 41v).
         20. In  response to Mercutio’s claim “That dreamers often lie,” he rebuts, “In 
bed asleep, where they do dream things true” (1.4.51–52).
         21. See Marjorie Garber,  “Dream Language in  Romeo and Juliet,” in Dream 
in Shakespeare: From Metaphor to Metamorphosis (New Haven and London: Yale 
University Press, 1974), 44–47. Garber suggests, however, that Romeo’s dream is not 
false, as the resurrection it envisions is metaphorically borne out in the monuments 
that enshrine the lovers’ memory.
         22. M.  M.  Mahood, Shakespeare’s Wordplay (London: Methuen, 1957), 72.
         23. This  passage must have hung in the mind of Anthony Munday when he 

“ was composing the ending of The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington (London, 1601): 
 See how he seekes to suck, if he could drawe, / Poyson from dead Matildaes ashie 
lips” (3005–3006).

61
52                                                  Tanya Pollard

         24. Eleazer Dunk, The Copy of a Letter written by E. D. [Eleazer Dunk] Doctour 
of Physicke to a Gentleman (London, 1606), 31.
         25. Ibid.
         26. Bullein,  Bulleins Bulwarke, 25v.
         27. Timothy   Bright,  A Treatise: Wherein is declared the sufficiencie of English 
Medicines, for cure of all diseases, cured with Medicine (London, 1590), 15–16.
         28. Philip   Barrough,  The Method of Phisick, Containing the Causes, Signes, 
and Cures of Inward Diseases in Mans Body from the Head to the Foote (London, 
1596), 24.
         29. André Du Laurens, A Discourse of the Preservation of the Sight: of Melancholike 
diseases; of Rheumes, and of Old age, trans. Richard Surphlet (London, 1599), 115.
         30. Although Shakespeare’s writings are not as saturated with medical imagery 
and references as are some of his contemporaries’ plays, such as those of Jonson 
and Webster, doctors and apothecaries appear in a number of his plays, including 
Cymbeline, King Lear, Macbeth, and All’s  Well That  Ends Well. Interestingly,  in 
contrast to most contemporary literary portrayals of doctors as sinister and malicious, 
Shakespeare’s doctors tend to be competent and kindly, and his observations about 
current medical treatments are for the most part very accurate. For more background 
on Shakespeare’s medical knowledge and representations of doctors, see Robert 
Simpson, Shakespeare and Medicine (Edinburgh: E. & S. Livingston,   1959); and 
Herbert Silvette, The Doctor on the Stage: Medicine and Medical Men in Seventeenth-
Century England, ed. Francelia Butler (Knoxville:   University  of Tennessee Press, 
1967).
         31. For an overview of medical perspectives on sleep in this period, see Karl 
H. Dannenfildt,  “Sleep: Theory and Practice in the Late Renaissance,” Journal of the 
History of Medicine and Allied Sciences 41 (1986): 415–441.
         32. Du  Laurens, Discourse, 95.
         33. Paré, Workes, 35.
         34. He describes, for example, “the Lethargie,” “Carus or Subeth,” “Congelation or 
taking,” and “dead sleepe, or, Coma” (Barrough, Method of Physick, 24, 29, 30).
         35. See David  Bevington,  “Asleep Onstage,” in  From Page to Performance: 
Essays in Early English Drama, ed. John A. Alford (East Lansing: Michigan  State 
University Press, 1995), 51–83.
         36. To point to merely a few other instances in Shakespeare, in The Taming of 
the Shrew a Lord asks of Christopher Sky, “What’s here? One dead, or drunk” (Ind. 
1.30); in Henry IV, Part Two, Hal mistakes his sleeping father for dead (4.5.21–47); 
and in  Cymbeline, Lucius,  like  many others,  wonders of  Imogen,  “Or  dead  or 
sleeping . . . ?” (4.2.356).
         37. Puck in A Midsummer Night’s Dream, for instance, encourages the audience 
to think  “That  you have but slumb’red here / While these visions did appear / And 
this weak and  idle theme,  /  No more  yielding  but a dream”  (5.1.425–428). The 
framing device for The Taming of the Shrew and Prospero’s comments on sleep and 
theater at the end of The Tempest suggest the same model.
         38.  George Walton   Williams   comments on  the  play’s uneasiness toward 
sleep in “Sleep in Hamlet,” Renaissance Papers 1964, ed. S. K. Heninger, Peter G. 
Phialas, and George Walton Williams  (Durham,  N.C.:  Southeastern Renaissance 
Conference, 1965), 17–20.
         39. Other examples abound; in Richard III, the young princes are killed while 
sleeping in the tower (4.3.1–22).

62
                       “A Thing  Like Death”: Sleeping Potions and Poisons                  53

         40. Prynne, Histriomastix, 956.
         41. Ibid., 946–947, emphasis in original.
         42.  Stephen Gosson, The Schoole of Abuse (London: Shakespeare Society, 
1841), 14.
         43. Antony and Cleopatra can be seen as reenacting essential aspects of Romeo 
and Juliet with older and more seasoned lovers. In both plays, lovers from opposing 
camps cross a political  divide  for  the  sake of  a grand  passion, yet the  scheme 
undertaken to circumvent  obstacles to their union—the  female lover  staging her 
own apparent death—leads to her lover’s suicide and ultimately her own.
         44.  All  references to Antony and Cleopatra are from M.  R.  Ridley’s Arden 
edition (London: Methuen,  1954).
         45. Cleopatra’s theatricality has been discussed by a number of critics. For a 
sampling of arguments about their  uses and effects, see Adelman, Common Liar; 
Jonathin Dollimore,  “Shakespeare, Cultural Materialism,  Feminism, and Marxist 
Humanism,” New Literary History 21 (1990): 471–493; Heather James, “The Politics 
of Display and the Anamorphic  Subjects of Antony and Cleopatra,” in Shakespeare’s 
Late Tragedies, ed. Susanne Wofford (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Simon and Schuster, 
1996), 208–234; Phyllis  Rackin,  “Shakespeare’s Boy Cleopatra, the Decorum of 
Nature and the Golden World  of Poetry,” PMLA  87 (1972): 201–212; and Jyotsna 
Singh, “Renaissance Anti-Theatricality, Anti-Feminism,  and Shakespeare’s Antony 
and Cleopatra,” Renaissance Drama, n.s., 20.
         46.  On  imagery of  dissolution and deliquescence, see especially Adelman, 
Common Liar.
         47. The  verb  “prorogue” offers  an interesting  link   with  Romeo and Juliet, 
where it is  used twice, both times  in  connection with  the lovers’ trials;  at 2.2.78 
Juliet declares dying preferable to postponing death for a life without Romeo, and at 
4.1.48 the friar refers to the apparent impossibility  of postponing Juliet’s marriage 
to Paris. Shakespeare’s only other use of the word comes after Antony and Cleopatra, 
in Pericles.
         48.  It  should  be noted that  the  audience does not, in  fact,  witness these 
two  particular  spectacles; both of them,  like  so much  of  the play,  are reported 
secondhand. Perhaps Cleopatra’s most effective performances, like a  basilisk or 
Gorgon, can only be withstood through an oblique view.
         49. Plutarch, “The  Life  of Marcus Antonius,”  The Lives of the Noble Grecians 
and Romanes, trans. Thomas North (London, 1579), 987.
         50. Ibid,  998.
         51.  Plutarch,  “Antony,”  Plutarch’s Lives, ed.  Bernadotte  Perrin  (London: 
William  Heinemann, 1920), 37.4, 60.1.
         52. On Antony’s explicit  links to Hercules throughout the play, see especially 
Eugene M.  Waith,   The Herculean Hero in Marlowe,  Chapman, Shakespeare, and 
Dryden (New York: Columbia University Press, 1962).
         53. According to myth, the shirt was given to Deianeira by the centaur Nessus, 
who was shot by Hercules with a poisoned arrow. Believing the  shirt to  be a love 
charm, Deianeira gave it to Hercules, unwittingly   causing his death. The allusion 
represents the tragic  culmination  of  Antony’s  Herculean unmanning,  comically 
depicted earlier in the  scene in which Cleopatra trades clothing  with  Antony  (“I 
drunk him  to his bed; / Then  put my tires and mantles on him, whilst /  I wore his 
sword Philippan” [2.5.21–23]), which alludes to Hercules’s bondage to Omphale.

63
54                                                  Tanya Pollard

         54. Arguing   that Cleopatra’s theatrical feigning  is malicious, Laura  Levine 
cites this scene as the basis for broader claims  about the theater’s dramatization 
of its  own dangers: “Such a moment  seem to cast theatre itself  as something so 
potent and so dangerous it has the capacity to make its spectator go home and kill 
himself. It  casts theatre, in other words, in terms much more bleak than the terms 
of the attacks.” See Men in Women’s Clothing: Anti-Theatricality and Effeminization, 
1579–1642 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 2.
         55. “Others  say againe, she kept it  in  a boxe, and that  she did pricke  and 
thrust it  with a spindell of golde, so that the Aspicke being angerd withal, lept out 
with  great furie, and  bitte her in  the  arme. Howbeit  fewe can tell the  troth.  For 
they report also, that she had hidden poyson in a hollow raser which she caried in 
the heare of her head: and yet was there no marke seene of her bodie, or any signe 
discerned that she was poysoned, neither also did they  finde  this  serpent in her 
tombe” (Plutarch, “Marcus Antonius,” 1010).
         56. Ibid,  1004. Interestingly,  Cleopatra’s experiments with poisons make an 
implicit reappearance in Cymbeline, when the physician Cornelius describes how the 
queen (probably played by the same boy actor who played Cleopatra) had practiced 
poisoning animals in preparing her attempted murder of Imogen (5.4.249–258).

64
                                       DAVID        SALTER


                          Shakespeare      and    Catholicism:  
                             The  Franciscan        Connection





In    the early months  of 1598, Thomas Speght, a  relatively obscure En- 
glish schoolmaster and antiquary, published a new edition of the Works of 
Geoffrey Chaucer: the first  to  appear in almost forty  years.1 With a few 
exceptions, Speght simply reproduced what he found in the earlier printed 
versions of Chaucer’s Works, but his edition is notable for the fact that  it 
is the first  to  employ (albeit in a rudimentary  form), the  beginnings of a 
critical, scholarly apparatus, designed to help overcome the difficulties that 
sixteenth-century readers were increasingly coming  to  experience when 
confronted by the obscurity of Chaucer’s language, and more generally by 
the historical remoteness of his time.2 Among the explanatory material that 
Speght included in his edition is a short biographical sketch of Chaucer, in 
which he outlined  what he believed to be the principal facts of  the poet’s 
life.3 While its relevance to the subject of Shakespeare’s religious affiliations 
may not be immediately  apparent, one particular  incident from  Speght’s 
Life of Chaucer casts an unexpected light on the ways in which Catholicism 
was discussed and understood in the closing years of the sixteenth century. 
For this episode—a supposed encounter between Chaucer and a Franciscan 
friar—not only reflects the pervasive hostility to the Catholic  Church that 
was the dominant discourse in England during  Shakespeare’s time, but it 
also highlights the important rhetorical role that the Franciscan Order had 


Cahiers Élisabéthains: Late Medieval and Renaissance Studies, Volume 66 (Autumn 2004): pp. 
9–22. Copyright © 2004 David Salter.

                                                        55

65
56                                             David Salter

unwittingly  come to play in anti-Catholic polemic. By considering the ways 
in which Shakespeare responds to this contemporary anti-Franciscan rheto-
ric we can shed some new light on the increasingly contested question of his 
own religious sensibilities and sympathies.
       In  the first instance, then, I shall approach the question of Shakespeare’s 
relationship to Catholicism indirectly, through a consideration of this anecdote 
 from Speght’s biography of Chaucer. And I hope that this initial discussion, 
however tangential it might at first appear, will both clear the ground for, and 
provide a point of entry  into, a more informed exploration of the  tradition 
of anti-Franciscan writing—a tradition  to which Shakespeare responded in 
such an original and singular way. I shall then, in the third and final part of 
this essay, turn to the plays themselves, examining the prominent Franciscans 
who figure in  three of  Shakespeare’s best-known works: Romeo and Juliet, 
Much Ado about Nothing (which was written just a few months after the ap-
pearance of Speght’s edition of Chaucer), and Measure for Measure.

                                                        ***
The relevant section of Speght’s biography deals with Chaucer’s education. 
After  spuriously identifying  the poet as an alumnus of  the universities of 
both Oxford  and  Cambridge, he goes on to  discuss what might  now be 
called Chaucer’s postgraduate studies:


       [ About the  latter  end  of  King   Richard  the  seconds daies he 
         Chaucer] florished in Fraunce, and got himselfe great comendation 
       there by his diligent  exercise in learning. After his returne home, 
       he  frequented the Court  at  London,  and the  Colledges of the 
       Lawyers, which there interprete the lawes of the lande, and among 
       them he had a familiar frend called John Gower [ . . . ] It seemeth 
       that  both  these learned men [Chaucer and Gower] were of the 
       inner Temple: for not many yeeres since, Master Buckley did see a 
       Record in the same house, where Geoffrey Chaucer was fined two 
       shillings  for beating a Franciscane fryer in Fleetstreete.4

Although it  is rather appealing to think of Chaucer as an impetuous young 
student, brought before the college authorities for  brawling  in  the street, 
unfortunately—like  virtually   every other  claim  made  by  Speght in  his 
short biography—it has no basis in fact.5 Even if we simply consider the short 
extract just quoted, it is inaccurate in almost every detail. We now know that 
contrary to Speght’s contention, Chaucer attended neither the University of 
Oxford nor Cambridge.6 While Chaucer is known to have visited France on 
a number of occasions, he never lived there for a prolonged period of time.7 
And  during the  latter years of  the reign of  Richard  II,  far  from being  a 

66
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           57

student prone to youthful pranks—as Speght suggests—Chaucer was in fact 
well into middle age, and a highly respected public servant who had connec-
tions with  some of the most powerful and influential  figures in  the land.8 
What is  more, the claim that  Chaucer was a student at the Inner Temple 
seems to be based on an anachronistic misreading of the  history of  that 
institution.9 For although the Inns of Court—that  is, Lincoln’s Inn,  Gray’s 
Inn, the Inner Temple, and the Middle Temple—did  indeed provide young 
students with a formal training in the law during  Speght’s lifetime (thereby 
assuming a function analogous to that of the two universities), recent studies 
have suggested that they had not developed this role at the end of the four-
teenth century. At that  time they  simply acted as residences for practising 
lawyers from the provinces, who needed accommodation near Westminster 
during the law terms.10 So, not only was Chaucer entirely the wrong age to 
be engaged in youthful high jinx  at the time  that Speght alleges, it would 
also seem that during his lifetime the Inner  Temple did not even function 
as an educational institution, making it extremely unlikely, to say the least, 
that Chaucer was ever in attendance there as a student.11
       But, if  the incident reported by Speght could not possibly have occurred 
(or at least not in the way that he suggests), how can it advance our knowl-
edge of Shakespeare’s relationship to Catholicism, the subject of this essay? 
What new light  might  it  cast upon the question of Shakespeare’s religious 
convictions? Although not immediately apparent, the answer to these ques-
tions lies with the unfortunate Franciscan friar whom Chaucer is alleged to 
have beaten up on Fleet Street. For whatever the source of Speght’s story, it 
is no coincidence that the victim  of Chaucer’s supposed attack—and, pre-
sumably, the source of his antipathy—was a member of that religious Order 
which later-sixteenth-century English Protestants had come to regard as the 
embodiment of everything that was wrong with the Church of Rome.12 It is 
worth noting in this  regard that throughout the second half of the sixteenth 
century, as Chaucer’s reputation as the founding father of English  poetry 
was repeatedly asserted, so too were his supposed sympathies for many of 
the causes that the Protestant reformers espoused.13 So taking just one ex-
ample among many, writing in the 1570 edition of his Ecclesiastical History, 
John Foxe, the great propagandist of the English Reformation, felt able to 
appropriate Chaucer on behalf of the Protestant cause by claiming that the 
poet “saw in Religion as much almost as we do now”.14 Ironically, Chaucer’s 
reputation as a fierce critic of the  Catholic Church, and as a figure whose 
works brought his readers—again to quote Foxe—“to the true  knowledge 
of religion”,15 was based in part on two violently anti-Catholic  satires that 
were falsely attributed to him during the sixteenth century: Jack Upland and 
The Plowman’s Tale, of which the first is a virulent attack on none other than 
the Franciscan Order.16 Viewed in this context, then, it would seem that for 

67
58                                             David Salter

Chaucer’s sixteenth-century Protestant readers, beating up a Franciscan friar 
was no mere random or casual act of violence, but a calculated and highly 
charged political statement, to be seen as a natural continuation or extension 
of the poet’s writing. For Speght’s anecdote would appear to suggest that such 
was Chaucer’s hostility to the Catholic  Church, that he could  not confine 
his criticism of it  simply to  the realm of satire. Rather, his antagonism was 
so virulent that he expressed it in the form of  a violent physical assault on 
that most representative of Catholic figures—a Franciscan friar. While the 
pen maybe mightier than the sword, Speght’s thinking seems to run, it is no 
substitute for the fist.
       At  the time  that Shakespeare was working as a playwright in London, 
then, the Franciscan Order fulfilled  a distinct  and well-recognised role in 
Protestant discourse. How the Order came to assume this function is a ques-
tion to which  I shall turn  shortly, but what is worth noting  at the moment 
is that for sixteenth-century English Protestants, writing about Franciscans 
had become an established shorthand way of attacking, satirising, and gener-
ally pillorying the Catholic Church. And as noted earlier, this is of particular 
relevance to a discussion of Shakespeare because three of his plays—Romeo 
and Juliet, Much Ado about Nothing, and Measure for Measure—feature promi-
nent Franciscan characters. Gauging the extent to which, and the manner 
in which, Shakespeare’s sympathies are genuinely engaged by his Franciscan 
figures, will thus provide us with one means of assessing his relationship more 
generally towards the religious controversies of his time.
       Until   recently, the question of Shakespeare’s religious affiliations pro-
voked relatively little interest from critics—at least compared to other areas 
of his life and work—although  there is a long-standing (if somewhat mar-
ginal) critical  tradition  that has identified  him  as a Catholic. Perhaps the 
principal reason why this  issue was relegated to the critical sidelines was 
because Shakespearean drama was generally seen as a predominantly secu-
lar form.17 Indeed, the whole history of the English theatre in the sixteenth 
century has traditionally been viewed as a kind of evolutionary narrative, in 
which—with  the exception of a brief  period in  the middle  of the  century 
dominated by religious plays—succeeding generations of playwrights were 
thought to have progressively freed themselves from the influence of religion 
and the Church. Thus, the so-called “primitive” religious drama of the early 
1500s is said to have given way to ever more secular and sophisticated forms, 
culminating at the  end of  the century with  the  entirely secular theatre of 
Shakespeare and his contemporaries.18 And this Whiggish interpretation of 
sixteenth-century literary history is one that has cast Shakespeare—however 
implicitly—in  a Protestant mould, in that it has aligned him with the forces 
of progress and reform, and in opposition to what came to be seen as the ir-
rational and superstitious tendencies manifest in the earlier drama associated 

68
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           59

with Catholic ritual  and practice. What is more, Shakespeare’s identification 
as the national poet has further consolidated his association with the national 
religion. And the fact that Shakespearean drama tends to steer clear of reli-
gious controversy—unlike the militantly Protestant writings of such figures 
as Spenser and Milton—only bolstered the view that his was the kind of re-
strained and understated Protestantism that is now so closely identified with 
the Anglican Church.19
       However,  while  mainstream critical  opinion  labelled Shakespeare a 
Protestant, albeit one of a secular bent, a succession of opposing voices going 
all the way back to Shakespeare’s own lifetime, identified him as a Catholic.20 
Among the best-known exponents of this view were Thomas Carlyle, who 
famously described Shakespeare in his 1840 lecture on “The Hero as Poet” 
as the noblest product of the Catholicism of the Middle   Ages, and Cardi-
nal John Henry Newman, who  in 1873 declared that Shakespeare was “at 
heart a Catholic”. This is a view that has been enthusiastically taken up in 
recent years, based in part on newly interpreted biographical evidence sug-
gesting that Shakespeare’s family remained loyal to the old faith in the later 
sixteenth-century, despite suffering persecution.21 Moreover, Shakespeare’s 
personal allegiance to the old faith may have been further consolidated if we 
are to accept the increasingly popular theory that he entered the service of the 
Catholic Houghton  family in  Lancashire during the 1580s.22 And in addi-
tion to the biographical evidence pointing to a Catholic affiliation—or at the 
very least association—on Shakespeare’s part, a number of recent studies have 
argued that his Catholic sympathies are reflected in the plays themselves.23
       While  offering  some support to this Catholic interpretation of Shake-
speare and his work, the approach I shall be adopting here is somewhat different 
from those that I have outlined above. For, whatever the methods they em-
ploy and the conclusions they ultimately reach, debate on Shakespeare and 
religion—not  surprisingly or  unreasonably—has focused on the figure of 
Shakespeare himself. Where my approach differs, a difference that I hope is 
reflected in the title of  my essay, is that I shall be examining Shakespeare’s 
treatment of Franciscans not only as a means of gauging his own religious 
sympathies and convictions, but also to throw light upon the use that Shake-
speare (and a number of his contemporaries) made of the Franciscan Order. 
In this way we will gain a better understanding of its broader cultural signifi-
cance in post-Reformation England. In so doing, I shall consider what it was 
about the Order that appealed so greatly to Shakespeare. For if, as I shall ar-
gue, he stands outside the Protestant tradition of anti-Franciscan writing—a 
tradition evident in Speght’s Life of Chaucer—why did he choose to present 
such highly controversial figures in his plays? What artistic opportunities did 
the Franciscan Order offer him?  Was his use of Franciscans ideologically 

69
60                                             David Salter

motivated? What areas of human experience did their presence in the plays 
allow him to explore? 

“ In       the pages that follow, I  shall consider each of Shakespeare’s three 
 Franciscan” plays in the order in which they were produced, starting with 
Romeo and Juliet (which is believed to have been written in 1594), moving 
onto Much Ado about Nothing (composed approximately four years later in 
1598), and concluding with  a discussion of Measure for Measure (which is 
thought to have been completed either in late 1603 or early 1604). But, in 
order to understand the nature of Shakespeare’s engagement with the Fran-
ciscan movement, it is first necessary to look briefly at the set of literary and 
artistic conventions that were associated with the Order in the Renaissance, 
and that shaped the ways in which it was represented and understood. For, 
although I shall argue that Shakespeare’s Franciscans constitute a radical de-
parture from the way in  which the Order  was conventionally depicted, the 
novelty and originality of  his Franciscan protagonists can only fully be ap-
preciated when they are set alongside the stereotypical figures that represent 
the norm.
       Perhaps the best way to describe the complex amalgam of conventions 
and protocols that governed literary depictions of the Franciscans is to ex-
plain how they came into force. For the turbulent history of  the Order lies 
behind and feeds into the literary representations of its members.

                                                        ***
The  famous fresco of  The Dream of  Innocent III  in   the basilica  of  the 
Upper Church of  San Francesco in Assisi (a work that is often attributed 
to Giotto)  provides a useful point of entry  into the  cultural history  of the 
Franciscan Order (see p. 13). Although  the veracity  of Innocent’s dream 
has often been called into question, an event of great historical significance 
nonetheless lies behind the image.24 In 1210, Francis of Assisi—accompa-
nied by his first twelve followers—travelled  to Rome to seek approval and 
official  sanction from  Pope Innocent  III  for  the  religious Order  that  he 
was hoping to establish. Adopting the name fratres minores, or lesser broth-
ers, Francis required members of his Order to observe literally and in every 
degree the life of preaching and absolute poverty, which—according to the 
Gospels—was followed by Christ  and his disciples. Innocent  was said to 
have been impressed by Francis’s piety and sincerity, but he feared that the 
Rule he was proposing was too  austere. However, the fresco depicts the 
divinely inspired  dream Innocent  is said to  have experienced that night, 
which convinced him  to  grant  his approval to  the Order.  Hence, in  the 
fresco, on the right  of the composition  Innocent can be seen lying asleep 
in bed, while on the left  the artist has represented his dream. In the latter 
a church (which  the legend identifies  as the papal basilica), is  in a state 

70
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           61

of near ruin,  and only  the  presence of Francis—who can be seen physi-
cally supporting  the  building   with  his  shoulder—prevents its  complete 
collapse.25
       The Dream of Innocent III brings together a number of important factors 
that were to prove crucial in determining how the  Order was subsequently 
perceived and understood, by both its supporters and its detractors. Clearly, 
the basilica’s unstable edifice is a particularly apt metaphor for the allegedly 
ruinous spiritual state of the Church, and Francis—and by implication the 
Order he founded—is seen to play a crucial role in restoring its integrity and 
stability. However, from the point of view of the present discussion, what is 
of even greater significance is that the image reveals just how intimately the 
history of the Order was bound up with that of the Papacy. From its very in-
ception—and often to the dismay of Francis himself—the Order functioned 
as the instrument of papal policy.26 The popes of the early thirteenth century 
saw that the Church was in desperate need of reform (or, to adopt the sym-
bolic language of Innocent’s dream, perilously close to collapse), and Francis 
and his followers provided them with the ideal means of tackling the crisis 
that they faced.27
       Paradoxically, however, the power and prestige that the Papacy con-
ferred on St Francis and his followers acted as a source of conflict within 
the wider Church. The bishops and priests in whose diocese and parishes the 
Franciscans were sent often resented the intrusion into their jurisdiction, and 
the competition that these interlopers provided. And because the Order was 
founded on such high and exacting ideals, any suggestion of moral compro-
mise on the part of the friars laid them open to accusations of hypocrisy. For 
although they were supposed to lead lives of mendicancy and itinerancy, it 
was claimed that in reality the friars were far from sparing in their pursuit of 
material comforts.28
       Such charges gave rise to a critical discourse which ossified into partic-
ular tropes highlighting  a popular view of Franciscan corruption, typically 
 including  traits  such as hypocrisy, greed, carnality, and lechery. While it 
had its origins  in  clerical controversy, such a disparaging construction of 
the Franciscan friar swiftly  found its way into  popular literary  forms such 
as comic tales and satires.29 What it is important to note, however, is that 
this was a Catholic  literary  tradition,   arising out  of  a particular  conflict 
between two competing models of Church governance. On the one hand, 
there was the traditional understanding of ecclesiastical organisation based 
on bishops holding—through apostolic succession—autonomy within their 
own dioceses, free from interference from Rome. On the other hand, there 
was a more centralised and centralising  conception of  the Church,  with 
the Pope claiming  the  right  to  intervene in  all ecclesiastical affairs. Be-
cause the Franciscan Order was perceived as a tool of this centralising papal 

71
62                                             David Salter

tendency, it became a natural target of wider resentment within the Church 
as a whole. Therefore, one obvious way to attack papal policy was by attack-
ing the Franciscans.
       It  is important to realise that Catholic writing critical of the Franciscan 
Order was not simply a response to the fact that the Order failed to live up 
to the ideals it  espoused—it often reflected fundamental differences in the 
ecclesiology of the Catholic Church. So in the Catholic tradition, Franciscans 
could be attacked for not being Catholic enough, in that they were seen to 
exist outside existing structures, hierarchies, and identities. According to their 
critics, they were neither priests nor monks, and so both literally and figura-
tively they had no fixed abode within the Church.30 In this context, far from 
Innocent III’s original vision, the Order was perceived in many quarters not as 
the mainstay of the Church, but as the most obvious threat to its stability.
       It   is not  surprising that  in  the wake of  the Reformation  this  tradi-
tion of anti-Franciscan writing appealed to and was appropriated by English 
Protestant writers, although the transition from  a Catholic to  a Protestant 
milieu reveals both continuities and differences. On one level, the reformers 
were able simply to repeat the criticisms of Franciscans that they found in 
Catholic works, albeit applying them to radically different ends. The corrup-
tions and abuses that Catholic critics accused the Franciscans of committing 
could now profitably be turned against the Roman Church  as a whole. As 
a result, Protestant polemic was able to take advantage of this ready-made 
mode of attack. 
       Although  the Order was suppressed in England in the early years of the 
Reformation, Franciscan friars continued to maintain a visible presence in 
Protestant literature, with attacks on Franciscans forming a commonplace of 
anti-Catholic polemic from  Bale to Milton  and beyond. Among the better-
known instances of such writing is Marlowe’s Doctor Faustus. When initially 
confronted by Mephistophiles, the devil’s appearance is too awful for Faustus 
to bear, so he dismisses the spirit with the command: “Go and return an old 
Franciscan friar / That holy shape becomes a devil best” (3, 26–27).31 And 
this disparagingly comic attack on the Order of St Francis is of a piece with 
the strongly anti-Catholic tone of the play as a whole, particularly given the 
jokes Faustus plays upon the Pope in Rome, who is, of course, surrounded by 
a retinue of friars.
       In  John Webster’s The White Devil, once again we find the Franciscan 
habit used as a cloak to disguise evil intentions. In the last act of the play, two 
followers of the aptly named Francesco, Duke of Florence, disguise them-
selves as Capuchin friars (the Capuchins being a branch of the Franciscan 
Order established in 1525, in  an attempt to  restore the movement to the 
austerity and simplicity that it originally espoused). Under the mask of holi-
ness that their borrowed habits confer, the two disguised Franciscans bring 

72
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           63

the drama to a suitably bloody conclusion by assassinating a whole host of 
their master’s enemies, in ever more cruel and sadistic fashion.32 In Webster’s 
drama, then, not only are Franciscans identified with violence and hypocrisy, 
but there is also the strong implication that these traits—particularly when 
undertaken with characteristic Italian chic—are somehow typical of Catholi-
cism in general.
       But  the appropriation  of this  mode of satire for  distinctly  Protestant 
ends is perhaps even more pronounced in George Whetstone’s Elizabethan 
rendering of a tale from Boccaccio’s Decameron, in which the translation from 
Italian to English also involves a cultural transposition from a Catholic to a 
Protestant ethos. In Boccaccio’s version of the story, which is set in Venice, a 
lecherous Franciscan, Frate Alberto, persuades a gullible woman that she is 
the lucky recipient of the Angel Gabriel’s amorous attentions. However, the 
friar tells the  woman that because mere mortals are unable to enjoy sexual 
intimacy with angels, Gabriel wishes to come to her in human form—and not 
surprisingly the form that the Angel chooses to adopt is that of Frate Alberto 
himself. Only after a considerable length of time is the friar exposed through 
the vanity of the woman, who boasts to her friend of her special status as the 
Angel Gabriel’s lover.33 But while Boccaccio’s tale focuses on the cupidity of 
friars and the gullibility of women, Whetstone’s translation, which appeared 
in 1582, goes much further. First he moves the action from Venice to rural 
Umbria, with the specific intention of providing the birthplace of St Francis 
as the setting of the tale. (Whetstone indicates at the very beginning of his 
narrative that its setting is: “a little Village among the Appenine Mountaynes 
not far from  the place, where Sainct Frances lyeth intomed”.)34 The reason 
for this  geographical shift is that in  the English  Protestant version of the 
tale, the young woman is told that it is the spirit of St Francis himself, rather 
than the Angel Gabriel, that intends to visit her, again through the medium 
of the friar’s body. And  in making  these changes, Whetstone considerably 
widens the scope of his attack. For in addition to the corruption of friars and 
the stupidity of women, his satirical target also includes the Catholic culture 
of rural Italy, with its roots firmly set in superstition and ignorance—the very 
bonds which Protestant writers believed held Catholics in thrall. (Whetstone 
thus notes that in the mountainous region of central Italy where the tale is 
set, Franciscans are revered “rather for their habyt, than their honestie: for 
the poor ignorant people, reverenced Sainct Frances, as a seconde Christe, for 
whose sake, they hold his Disciples, not inferior  to  Saincts”.)35 Moreover, 
the replacement of the Angel Gabriel by St Francis himself as the woman’s 
putative suitor, adds a further level of anti-Franciscan satire to the tale. At no 
point does the woman query the saint’s intentions: his lechery is simply taken 
for granted.

73
64                                             David Salter

                                                        ***
This brief account of the origins  and development of the tradition of anti-
Franciscan writing enables us to consider Shakespeare’s friars in their proper 
historical and cultural context, allowing  us better to assess any religious or 
extra-literary significance they  might  possess. And perhaps what is most 
immediately apparent  when examining  Romeo and Juliet from  the  per-
spective of this literary tradition   is just how deliberately and emphatically 
Shakespeare identifies the character of  Friar  Lawrence as a Franciscan. 

“ Two of Lawrence’s own utterances—“Holy Saint Francis”  (II.1.65),  and 
 Saint  Francis be my  speed!” (V.3.121)—clearly point  to  his  Franciscan 
affiliation,  while  he is called “Holy  Franciscan friar” (V.2.1) by his  fellow 
mendicant, Friar  John.36 Moreover, Friar Lawrence swears by  his “holy 
Order” (III.3.113),  and elsewhere in the play his priestly office  and mem-
bership of a religious brotherhood are repeatedly emphasised. So Lawrence 
is no mere generic priest or friar; rather, he is quite explicitly identified as a 
Franciscan. Bearing in mind what we have observed in the work of Marlowe, 
Webster, and Whetstone, such an identification might lead us to expect the 
portrait of  friar  Lawrence to be somehow derogatory or satirical. And the 
earlier versions of  the  story—both  English   and  Continental—certainly 
offered Shakespeare a great deal of scope to present the role in such a way. 
However, far from exploiting  the character of Friar Lawrence for  partisan 
Protestant ends, Shakespeare portrays his Franciscan in a far more positive 
light, investing him  with a great deal of moral and dramatic authority.
       Shakespeare’s principal source for Romeo and Juliet was Arthur Brooke’s 
The Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Juliet (published in 1562), which was 
itself a  translation—through an  intermediary French version—of  Matteo 
(“Bandello’s Italian novella: “La sfortunata morte di dui infelicissimi amanti . . .” 
  The unfortunate death of  two most wretched lovers . . .”). Bandello’s ac-
count of the story (which was first published in 1554) was in turn based on 
an even earlier Italian source: a novella by Luigi da Porto, which was the first 
version of the tale to be set in Verona, to call the warring families Montecchi 
and Capelletti (Shakespeare’s Montagues and Capulets), to give the lovers 
the names of Romeo and Giulietta, to identify the friar as a Franciscan, and 
to name him Lorenzo (Lawrence).37
       Significantly, both of  these Italian versions of the tale reveal a residual 
distrust of Frate Lorenzo, whose motives are never above suspicion. Nowhere 
is this more apparent than in the famous scene in the Capelletti crypt, when 
Giulietta awakes from her death-like sleep to find herself unexpectedly ly-
ing next to a man. This is, of course, the body of her dying lover, Romeo, but 
Giulietta at first  suspects that it is Frate Lorenzo who is lying  by her side, 
presumably because this is the kind of base and lecherous conduct that one 
expects from a Franciscan in the world of Italian novelle.38 While Giulietta’s 

74
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           65

misgivings in this case prove to be unfounded, both da Porto and Bandello 
repeatedly draw attention to the self-serving motivation underlying the friar’s 
actions. For instance, we are told that the reason why Lorenzo befriends Ro-
meo in the first place is because he is powerful and influential.39 In addition, 
the friar agrees to assist the lovers in their plan to marry, not simply because 
he believes that their union will bring  about the reconciliation of their two 
households, but more importantly, in the hope that  his role in  ending the 
family feud will be fully recognised and rewarded.40
       As  he appears in the work of both da Porto and Bandello, then, Frate 
Lorenzo is an extremely equivocal figure, and it is his role as a Franciscan 
friar that seems to lie behind and provoke much—if not all—of his emotional 
ambivalence. On the one hand, as a member of a religious Order, Lorenzo is 
not bound by ties of loyalty or patronage to either of the two warring fami-
lies, which enables him to adopt a neutral position in their  dispute, and to 
retain the trust and confidence of both sides. And it  is for this reason that 
although Romeo and Giulietta come from the two rival households—and so 
have no prior knowledge of one another—they know Frate Lorenzo equally 
well, and hold him in equally high esteem. Thus, Lorenzo’s narrative function 
within the tale is made possible by virtue of his membership of the Franciscan 
Order, which confers on him a freedom of movement and association that 
no other character enjoys, and a detachment from the family feud that  so 
dominates the world of the story.41 On the other hand, however, and as we 
have already seen, the suspicion and distrust that generally characterises the 
portrayal of Franciscans in Italian novelle can be discerned in the treatment 
of Frate Lorenzo. As Giulietta reveals in the crypt, while the friar seems to 
enjoy the confidence of all the protagonists, this trust is only skin deep, and 
even the good that he does perform is shown to be self-serving in its underly-
ing motivation.
       There would  therefore appear to be a jarring discrepancy—even con-
flict—between the generic portrayal of  Franciscans in Italian novelle, and 
the actual narrative function of Frate Lorenzo. For, whereas the friar labours 
under the cloud of doubt and suspicion that characterises literary represen-
tations of his Order, the  narrative role he is assigned requires him to be a 
figure who inspires confidence and trust. And the ambivalence that inevitably 
results from this mismatch between expectation and function is all the more 
pronounced in Arthur  Brooke’s English version of the tale, which—as was 
noted earlier—was Shakespeare’s immediate source.
       As  one  might  expect from   an English  Protestant like   Brooke, his 
portrayal of Fryer Lawrence is deeply coloured by the conventions of anti- 
Catholic polemic, and nowhere is this disdain for the Church of Rome more 
apparent than in his prefatory address to the reader:

75
66                                             David Salter

       And  to  this ende (good Reader) is this tragicall  matter written, 
       to  describe unto  thee a coople of  unfortunate  lovers, thralling 
       themselves to  unhonest  desire, neglecting  the  authoritie   and 
       advise of parents and frendes, conferring their principall counsels 
       with  dronken gossyppes, and superstitious friers (the naturally fitte 
       instrumentes of unchastitie) attemptyng all adventures of peryll, for 
       thattaynyng of their  wished lust.42


“ Brooke is particularly explicit in  condemning the  Catholic  sacrament of 
 auricular confession” administered by Fryer Lawrence, which in  Brooke’s 

“ view is the “kay of whoredome, and treason”, and which he sees as crucial in 
 hastyng [Romeus and Juliet] to most unhappye deathe”.
       So the impression gained from Brooke’s prefatory address would seem to 
be clear and unambiguous. Far from being the victims either of fate, circum-
stance, or their tyrannical parents, Romeus and Juliet are themselves responsible 
 for  their own  demise. By selfishly putting  their  own sexual gratification 
before the duty  of  obedience they owe their  families,  they bear the  full 
burden of guilt  and culpability.  Moreover, “the  superstitious” Fryer Law-
rence—a figure of no higher moral standing than a “dronken gossyppe”—
wilfully  aids and abets the lovers in their perfidious course of action, using 
the secret, even occultist, rituals  of  the Catholic   Church  to  achieve his 
perverse ends.
       But,  turning from  Brooke’s prefatory address to the poem itself, a very 
different picture both  of the  lovers and of the  friar  emerges. As Geoffrey 
Bullough notes, the tone of moral condemnation so pronounced in the pref-
ace disappears entirely in the main narrative, giving way to a sympathetic and 
sentimental portrait of the young couple, whose loving marriage is presented 
as wholly admirable.43 This same transformation occurs in Brooke’s treatment 
of Fryer Lawrence. Rather than the anti-Catholic stereotype depicted in the 
preface, the friar of the poem is a model of virtuous, restrained, moderation. 
Prompted by motives of pure, disinterested friendship and a genuine desire 
for civic harmony, he agrees to assist the lovers, offering them wise and rea-
sonable advice throughout. So it is the capriciousness of fate, and not the 
recklessness or perversity of the friar and the lovers, that brings about the 
tragic conclusion. And what is so remarkable about this volte-face on Brooke’s 
part is that he seems to be almost totally oblivious of any inconsistency, and 
he makes no attempt to harmonise the discrepancy between the preface and 
the main narrative. Perhaps the closest Brooke comes to acknowledging— 
albeit implicitly—any disparity  in his presentation of Lawrence is when he 
first introduces the friar.  For while  emphasising Lawrence’s goodness and 
wisdom, Brooke also notes that these qualities tend not to be shared by most 
members of the Franciscan Order:

76
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           67

       This  barefoote fryer gyrt with cord his grayish
                                                                weede, 
       For he of Frauncis order was, a fryer as I reede,
       Not  as the most was he, a grosse unlearned foole, 

       [  . But doctor of divinitie proceded he in schoole.
            . . ]
       Of  all he is beloved well, and honord much of all. 
       And  for he did the rest in wisdome farre exceede, 
       The  prince by him his counsell cravde and holpe at
                                                                time of  neede. 
            (ll.  565–568 & 578–580). 

The difficulty  Brooke seems to face, here, is in reconciling his own antago-
nism to the Catholic Church—to which the tradition of anti-Franciscan satire 
gives such full  expression—with the demands and logic of  the narrative, 
which requires Fryer Lawrence to be a sympathetic figure, who commands 
the respect not just of  the two  lovers, but of  Verona society more gener-
ally. By characterizing the typical Franciscan as “a grosse unlearned foole”, 
thereby implying that Fryer Lawrence is something of an anomaly, Brooke 
is—to a certain extent—able to square this particular circle. But there still 
remain, the fundamental opposition between the dogmatic demands of reli-
gious polemic on the one hand, and the requirements of the narrative on the 
other, and when taken as a whole, The Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Juliet 
leaves this opposition unresolved. 
       The emotional ambivalence that so characterises Brooke’s conception of 
the friar is conspicuously absent from the protagonist who appears in Shake-
speare’s Romeo and Juliet. Shakespeare completely discards the polemical 
subtext that inflects all of the previous portraits of Friar Lawrence—wheth-
er Catholic or  Protestant—and presents instead a figure of unquestionable 
moral integrity. Indeed, Shakespeare seems to go out of his way completely 
to exonerate Lawrence of blame for the tragic  events in which he plays a 
part. Hence, in the final scene of the play, and after all of the unhappy cir-
cumstances have been fully brought to light, the Prince clears Friar Lawrence 
of any guilt for the lovers’ death, indicating: “We still have known thee for a 
holy man” (V.3.270). And as the ultimate and undisputed source of authority 
within the play, the Prince’s judgement commands the respect not just of the 
protagonists on stage, but of the audience as well.
       Shakespeare thus appears to have had no interest in exploiting the sa-
tirical or polemical possibilities presented by the figure of Friar Lawrence, a 
temptation to which all of his predecessors had succumbed. Instead, Shake-
speare’s Franciscan can be said to function more in an archetypal than  a 
satirical mode.44 For rather than being a vehicle for anti-Catholic sentiment, 

77
68                                             David Salter

he is presented as a sage who officiates mage-like over both the sacred and 
secular rites of the play, overseeing the marriage of the young couple, which 
he hopes will then bring about the civil union of their warring families. (And 
significantly, there is absolutely nothing self-serving at work here: Friar Law-
rence has no wish for recognition or preferment; it is simply the interests of 
the lovers, and the wider civic good that motivates his actions.) Moreover, as 
the only character who bridges different worlds and stands above the fray, 
Shakespeare’s friar enjoys the neutrality and detachment that the narrative 
demands of his role, and yet his priestly office transcends the limiting and 
limited parameters fixed by the conventions of both  Catholic  and Protes-
tant anti-Franciscan writing. In  his  Shakespearean incarnation, then, Friar 
Lawrence attains the disinterestedness, the capacity to be—in the words of 
Northrop Frye—“detached but not withdrawn”, that is so conspicuously lack-
ing in all of the previous versions of the role.

                                                        ***
The archetypal functions performed by Friar Lawrence are even more pro-
nounced in romance than in tragedy. The key figure responsible for bringing 
about the happy ending in Much Ado about Nothing is none other than a Friar 
Francis, whose name alone seems to carry with it an obvious significance, 
but with  none of the  polemical baggage of religious controversy. In Much 
Ado, Shakespeare successfully rewrites the ending of Romeo and Juliet in 
romance terms, with Friar Francis triumphantly  achieving the marital and 
civic harmony that eluded Friar Lawrence.
       Despite the difference of genre, there are nonetheless compelling struc-
tural and thematic affinities connecting Romeo and Juliet and Much Ado about 
Nothing. On the most basic and straightforward level, both plays are set in 
Italy, and each uses a novella of Matteo Bandello as a principal source.45 In 
addition, they both centre on young lovers who for  one reason or another 
experience problems in successfully passing from a single to a married state. 
Adopting an  anthropological approach, here, it could be said that the two 
plays are concerned with marriage as a rite of passage; that is, with marriage 
as a ritualised ceremony whose purpose—to quote Joseph Campbell—is “to 
conduct people across those difficult thresholds of transformation that de-
mand a change in the patterns not only of conscious but also of unconscious 
life”.46 As we have already seen, in the case of Romeo and Juliet it is impossible 
for the young couple to live  together openly as husband and wife, because 
the warring feud  between their two  families prevents them from  publicly 
acknowledging their relationship. In Much Ado about Nothing on the other 
hand, Claudio mistakenly believes that Hero, his betrothed, has a lover, and 
for this reason he violently denounces and then rejects her during the wed-
ding ceremony itself. So while the particular problems confronting Claudio 

78
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           69

and Hero are very different from those facing Romeo and Juliet, when viewed 
in anthropological terms, the result in both cases is that the lovers’ transition 
from a single to a married state is blocked.
       It  is here that the similarity in the role of the two Franciscans becomes 
apparent, for both friars seek to assist the couples in successfully negotiat-
ing the pitfalls  that hinder  or impede their  respective marriages. Not only 
does Friar Lawrence officiate at the wedding of  Romeo and Juliet, but he 
also offers Juliet what she hopes will be a way of preventing her enforced and 
bigamous marriage to Paris—a sleeping potion that so paralyses the senses 
that it seems to kill those who take it. And just as Friar Lawrence urges Juliet 
to feign death in  order to achieve a full-married life  with  Romeo, so Friar 
Francis tells Hero that she must “die to live” (IV.1.253).47 For the one way 
to bring about the hoped-for marital union—the friar argues—is to let it be 
known that Hero  is dead, since it is only by  making Claudio feel remorse 
for his actions, and so causing him to experience a sense of personal loss for 
Hero’s supposed death, that he will come to a proper understanding of her 
true worth.
       In  each of the two plays, then, the heroines experience a form of sym-
bolic death, but it is an ordeal that they both have to undergo in order to have 
at least the prospect of a new life. And it  is the two friars—Lawrence and 
Francis—who oversee these mysterious, quasi-magical rites. Of course, it is 
significant that the attempt to resurrect Juliet fails, whereas Hero successfully 
passes through the ritual of death and rebirth, but this is not a reflection on 
the relative moral worth of  the two Franciscans, rather it is a consequence 
of the different  narrative trajectories of tragedy and romantic-comedy. (To 
quote Byron’s somewhat flippant comments from Don Juan: “All tragedies 
are finished by a death / All comedies are ended by a marriage”).48 Moreover, 
that the conclusion of Much Ado about Nothing is a self-conscious rework-
ing of Romeo and Juliet is further suggested by the fact that Friar Francis is 
an invention of Shakespeare’s—there is no precedent for the role in any of 
the play’s sources. Shakespeare can therefore be said almost to have reprised 
the role of Friar Lawrence when writing Much Ado about Nothing, a role that 
he transposed into comic-romantic terms. Or to quote Geoffrey Bullough, Fri-
ar Francis is none other than “Friar Lawrence up to his old tricks again”.49
       The  shift  from   tragedy to  romantic-comedy gives Shakespeare the 
chance to exploit much more fully  the narrative opportunities  inherent in 
the role of the friar. Appearing only at the moment of crisis, when his wisdom 
is most needed, Friar Francis emerges as the key to unlocking the romantic 
possibilities that seem impossibly remote after Claudio’s humiliation of Hero. 
Without  Francis there can be no happy ending, for in devising the plan to 
resurrect a woman mistakenly thought to be dead, he manages not simply 
to re-unite the lovers, but to re-establish civil harmony as well. As with Friar 

79
70                                             David Salter

Lawrence, Shakespeare invests an enormous amount of moral and narrative 
authority in  Friar Francis, although his  significance is in many ways even 
greater than that of his predecessor. Because he functions not in the tragic 
milieu of  Romeo and Juliet, but in the comic world of romance, his almost 
mystical presence is all the more acceptable and exploitable on a dramatic 
level. It is his archetypal role to oversee a number of typical romance move-
ments towards resolution and the establishment of harmony. For instance, 
he is responsible for the shift at the end of the play from a state of penitence 
and guilt on Claudio’s part to one of forgiveness and reconciliation. Likewise, 
he assists the couple in their passage from youthful immaturity to the adult 
world of marital responsibility. On a grander scale, a corollary to these trans-
formations could be seen in any one of a number of the archetypal romance 
movements to which critics such as Northrop Frye draw attention.50 For in 
Frye’s terms, Friar Francis can be seen as the agent of those romantic, cyclical 
patterns that underpin the appearance of new life out of death, or more gen-
erally the emergence of hope and renewal—symbolised by marriage—when 
all seemed bleak and sterile. In this sense, then, Friar Francis does indeed 
fulfil a sacred function, but it is not one that is confined to the strictures laid 
down in either Catholic or Protestant discourse. As a figure working in align-
ment with—and as an instrument of—the natural forces of cyclical renewal, 
Friar Francis can be said to exude a spirituality that in some respects is more 
pagan than Christian. As Northrop  Frye notes: “when [the resolution of  a 
Shakespearean comedy] is accomplished by a human being [ . . . ] that char-
acter has about him something of the mysterious aura of divinity, symbolised 
by magic or sanctity”.51

                                                        ***
What is surprising about the two  friars we have encountered so far is that 
they are unusual—if  not  unprecedented—in going beyond the  imagina-
tive  possibilities typically   or  stereotypically  assigned to  Franciscans in 
both Catholic  and Protestant popular literature.  However, in  Measure for 
Measure, the last of Shakespeare’s three “Franciscan” plays, the business of 
friars and their presentation becomes much more complicated. This is partly 
because we are presented not with a friar per se, but with the secular figure 
of Duke Vincentio, the prince of Vienna, who disguises himself as a friar in 
order secretly to observe how his deputy, Angelo, administers justice in his 
absence. The Duke’s adoption of the friar’s habit for the purpose of disguise 
renders his status somewhat ambiguous, for he undertakes some of the sacred 
duties of a priest, only to cast off the friar’s costume at the end of the play 
when he reassumes his role as a secular ruler. But, while the precise nature 
of the Duke’s religious identity  is never fully  clarified,  the play does have 
a genuine Franciscan protagonist whose credentials are  beyond dispute. 

80
                                     Shakespeare and Catholicism                           71

Isabella is a member of the sisterhood of St Clare—the second of the three 
Franciscan Orders—although she is still a novice, having yet to make her 
final vows.
       As is the case with Much Ado about Nothing, the religious or quasi-religious 
figures of  Measure for Measure—the Franciscan nun  and  the  disguised 
friar—are not  to be found  in any of  the play’s sources; they are seeming-
ly Shakespeare’s invention.52 Their presence in the play therefore suggests 
Shakespeare’s continuing interest in the dramatic possibilities presented by 
Franciscans. But while in  some respects Measure for Measure does revisit 
ground already explored in the two earlier plays, the inclusion of the element 
of disguise radically alters the way in which these by now familiar situations 
and concerns are worked out.
       As  suggested above, when disguised as Friar Lodowick, the dramatic 
function of the Duke is in  many ways similar to that of Friar Lawrence and 
Friar Francis. He seeks to bring about justice and to repair the torn fabric of 
the characters’ social and emotional lives by reuniting lovers and solving fam-
ily crises. In this way, he also oversees the same romantic movement within 
the plot evident in Much Ado about Nothing, although in the case of Measure 
for Measure there are two couples—Claudio and Juliet, and Angelo and Mari-
ana—who are brought together by the Friar-Duke. And once again, the play 
hinges on the failure of these couples successfully to negotiate unaided the 
pitfalls and impediments associated with marriage as a rite of passage. On 
the one hand, Claudio and Juliet gain sexual knowledge of one another be-
fore their marriage has been sanctified and legally sanctioned by a legitimate 
wedding ceremony, while on the other, Angelo rejects Mariana because she 
is unable to provide him with a sufficiently large dowry. During the course of 
the play, then, Friar Lodowick attempts to resolve all of the sources of con-
tention and antagonism—whether legal, social, or emotional—that prevent 
the two couples from entering into a full-married  life. In  addition, Measure 
for Measure enacts the same ritualised pattern of symbolic death and rebirth 
that we have observed in Much Ado about Nothing. Claudio faces execution for 
breaking Vienna’s “strict statutes and most biting laws” (I.3.19) against forni-
cation.53 But at the behest of Friar Lodowick the death sentence is not carried 
out, a fact that is kept from both  the legal authorities and Claudio’s family. 
Claudio is kept in hiding  until  the very end of the play, when his dramatic 
reappearance has an air of the miraculous, analogous to the “resurrection” of 
Hero at the end of Much Ado. And once again, it is a friar—or at least a friar 
in disguise—who oversees this seemingly magical rite.
       However, while Measure for Measure repeats much that is familiar from 
the earlier plays, the fact that the Duke is a feigned rather than a real friar 
complicates and makes problematic his role.54 In part, because he is a secu-
lar ruler policing his realm, the disguise serves an ulterior political purpose. 

81
72                                             David Salter

But, even more problematically, the Duke’s role as a friar is conflated—and 
in conflict—with   his role as a lover. As a friar, he is  of course licensed to 
roam freely through the city and to  access all areas of people’s lives, and in 
that role he commands the trust of  those around him. As we have already 
noted, friars enjoyed the freedom to mix with all strata of society, or in the 
Duke’s words, “to visit both prince and people” (I.3.45), and it is precisely this 
privilege that makes the role of a friar so amenable to the Duke’s purposes. 
However, the trust, conferred on the Duke by his adoption of the friar’s habit 
is compromised because he seems to use it for his own personal advantage, 
both as a ruler and as a suitor to Isabella. The Duke has therefore none of 
the selfless detachment that is so characteristic of Friar Lawrence and Friar 
Francis. Indeed, there is more than a hint of emotional manipulation at work 
here. The Duke’s actions expose him to the accusation that in the guise of a 
friar he is granted—and takes full advantage of—the opportunity to inveigle 
himself into Isabella’s affections while her guard is down. As a nun, Isabella 
naturally trusts, respects, and confides in the figure of Friar Lodowick, whom 
she believes to be a fellow Franciscan, and whom she consequently treats as a 
spiritual guide and mentor. The false pretext under which the Duke is intro-
duced to—and establishes a relationship with—Isabella, perhaps renders her 
unduly susceptible to his powers of influence and persuasion. In other words, 
it could be argued that part of what defines Measure for Measure as a problem 
play rests with the Duke’s use, and possible abuse, of the friar’s habit.
       The problems and complications of Measure for Measure notwithstand-
ing, I hope that what this study has demonstrated is the originality of Shake-
speare’s use of Franciscans—an originality that stems from what appears to 
be a complete lack of interest on his part in exploiting the friars for polemical 
or satirical ends. For Shakespeare carves roles for his friars that transcend the 
narrow strictures and limitations that define and confine the Franciscans found 
in the popular literature of both the medieval and the Renaissance periods.
       However,  placing these three plays in   the broader context  of  anti- 
Franciscan writing    inevitably   raises the   moot   question  of   what—if 
anything—they reveal about Shakespeare’s religious sympathies. In a climate 
where hostility to friars was almost an unconscious Protestant reflex, the fact 
that Shakespeare presents such sympathetic Franciscans appears to carry 
a great deal of religious significance. Indeed, it is tempting to view Shake-
speare’s friars as an implicit declaration of Catholic allegiance—or at the very 
least sympathy—on his part. But as I have argued, I think it would be wrong 
to see Shakespeare’s Franciscans in too overtly religious or ideological a man-
ner. Friar Lawrence and Friar Francis are not Catholic propaganda, deployed 
by Shakespeare to counter or rebut the overwhelmingly negative portrayal of 
the Franciscan Order—and by extension the Church of Rome—to which the 
Protestant literature of the time gave such prominence. Rather, Shakespeare’s 

82
                                         Shakespeare and Catholicism                                    73

friars  seem to  signal  more a  retreat from   the  world   of religious   controversy 
than  an entry  into   it.  Although   Franciscans  enjoyed  a very  visible  presence 
in  the literature   of  the  late-sixteenth   century,  by  that  time  the  Order   itself 
had been  absent  from   England   for  more  than   half  a century.  To  many  of 
Shakespeare’s contemporaries, then,  Franciscan  friars  must have appeared  to 
be figures  who  belonged   more  to  the  distant   past or  to  far  off   lands  than 
to  the  quotidian   world   of  the  here  and  now.55 And   this  remoteness  from 
contemporary   English   life  would   have leant  them  an  air  of  the  exotic  and 
the  mysterious,  making   them   ideally  suited  to   artistic  exploitation    on  the 
stage, particularly  in the  genre of romantic-comedy.   And  perhaps, if  the play-
wright’s  family   were  indeed  recusants, of  whatever  degree  of  commitment, 
then  that  exoticism  may  have been coloured   with  a nostalgic   hankering  for 
a period  when  spirituality   seemed a simpler,  less contested issue.” Moreover, 
while  both  Friar Lawrence   and Friar  Francis are unmistakably   sacred figures, 
the aura  of sanctity  that  surrounds  them   is as much  pagan as it  is Christian 
in nature.  For  both  friars   can be seen as repositories  of  power  and  wisdom, 
who act  in harmony   with  cyclical,  natural  energies to  bring  about  individual 
rebirth  and  social renewal.  So whatever  his  religious  convictions,  it  is  worth 
remembering  that   Shakespeare had the  discipline   and  the  detachment  of  a 
great artist. And   perhaps it  is these qualities, as much  as any religious sympa-
thies, that enabled  him  both to  see and to exploit  the imaginative   possibilities 
suggested by the Order  of  St Francis.

                                                         Notes

         1.  The Workes of our Antient and lerned English Poet, Geffrey Chaucer, newly 
Printed, ed. Thomas Speght (London: Adam Islip, 1598). This has been reproduced 
in facsimile in  Derek Brewer, ed. Geoffrey Chaucer: The Works, with supplementary 
material from the editions of 1542,1561, 1598 and 1602 (Ilkley: Scolar Press, 1974).
         2. For  a discussion of Speght’s edition of the Works  of Chaucer, see Derek 
Pearsall’s “Thomas Speght”, in Editing  Chaucer: The Great Tradition, ed. Paul G. 
Ruggiers (Norman,  Oklahoma:  Pilgrim  Books,  1984), 71–92. See also Alice  S. 
Miskimin,  The Renaissance Chaucer (New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 
1975), 250–253.
         3. Speght’s “Life” of Chaucer was reprinted by E. P. Hammond in her Chaucer: 
A Bibliographical Manual (New York: Macmillan, 1908), 19–35.
         4. Hammond,  Chaucer: A Bibliographical Manual, 21–22.
         5. To  a great extent, Speght’s biography draws on the accounts of Chaucer’s 
life written by John Leland and John Bale, although the claim that Chaucer attended 
both the University  of Cambridge and the Inner  Temple—along with  the story of 
his violent altercation with the Franciscan friar—are not found in any of the earlier 
sources. Writing at the end of the nineteenth century, Thomas Lounsbury showed 
that these early biographical accounts of Chaucer’s life have almost no basis in fact. 
For Lounsbury’s discussion of what he called “The Chaucer Legend”, see his Studies 

83
74                                                   David Salter

in Chaucer, His Life and Writing, 3 vols. (London & New York: Osgoof & McIlvaine, 
1892), vol. 1, 129–224, especially 155–173.
           6. For an account of Chaucer’s education, much of which would seem to have 
been informal in nature, and to have taken place in the various noble households in 
which he served, see Derek Pearsall, The Life of Geoffrey Chaucer (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1988), 29–34.
           7. See Pearsall, The Life of Geoffrey Chaucer, 47 and 51–53.
           8. The  exact date of Chaucer’s birth is not known.  However, the scholarly 
consensus is that he was born some time during the early 1340s, which would make 
him  well over fifty   during  the  latter  days of Richard  II’s  reign. For  the date of 
Chaucer’s birth, see Pearsall, The Life of Geoffrey Chaucer, 9–11.
           9. I owe this insight to  Joseph A. Hornsby’s, “Was Chaucer Educated at the 
Inns of Court?”, The Chaucer Review, 22 (1988), 254–268.
         10. See Hornsby, “Was Chaucer Educated at the Inns of Court?”, 260–264.
         11. Speght’s claim  that  Chaucer attended the  Inner  Temple has been the 
subject of much critical  debate over the years. See Edith Rickert,  “Was  Chaucer 
a Student at the  Inner Temple?”, The Manly Anniversary Studies in Language and 
Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago,  1923), 20–31; John Matthews Manly, 

“ Some New Light on Chaucer (New York: H. Holt & Co., 1926), 7–18; D. S. Bland, 
 Chaucer and the Inns of Court: A Re-Examination”, English Studies 33 (1952),145–
155; and Pearsall, The Life of Geoffrey Chaucer, 29–30 and 317, footnote 13.
         12. That Speght’s anecdote implicitly aligns Chaucer with the reformers of the 
sixteenth century has been noted by Joseph Hornsby, “Was Chaucer Educated at the 
Inns of Court?”, 256–257.
         13.   Caroline   Spurgeon—writing     in   1925—noted   that    Chaucer  was 
appropriated by the reformers of  the  sixteenth century, who  identified  him  as a 
figure who  shared many of their  opinions on the Church  of  Rome. See Caroline 

( Spurgeon, Five Hundred Years of Chaucer Criticism and Allusion, 1357–1900, 3 vols. 
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1908–1912), vol. 1, xix–xx. See also Linda 
Georgianna, “The  Protestant Chaucer”, in Chaucer’s Religious Tales, ed. C. David 
Benson and Elizabeth Robertson (Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 1990), 55–69, 56.

( 14.        Cited in Derek Brewer, ed., Geoffrey Chaucer: The Critical Heritage, 2 vols. 
 London: Routledge &  Kegan Paul, 1978), vol. 1, 108.
         15. Brewer, Geoffrey Chaucer, vol. 1, 108.
         16.  Jack Upland is attributed  to  Chaucer in  the  earliest surviving  printed 
edition of the text, which dates from 1536. John Foxe reprinted the tract in 1570—
again attributing it  to Chaucer—in the  second edition of his Actes and Monuments. 
It  was first  included in  an edition  of  Chaucer’s Works by Thomas Speght in his 
second edition of 1602. For a modern edition of the work, see P. L. Heyworth, ed., 
Jack Upland, Friar Daw’s Reply, and Upland’s Rejoinder (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1968).
         17.  A.   C.  Bradley’s  comments  on  the  secular  milieu   of  Shakespeare’s 
theatre are reasonably characteristic of this critical  tradition.   See A. C.  Bradley, 

“ Shakespearean Tragedy (London: Macmillan, 1904), 15. See also George Santayana, 
(The Absence of Religion in  Shakespeare”, in Interpretations of Poetry and Religion 
 New York: Scribner’s, 1916), 147–165, and Robert Murrell Stevenson, Shakespeare’s 
Religious Frontier (The Hague: Martinus Nijoff, 1958), 20.
         18. See, for instance, Charles William  Wallace, The Evolution of the English 
Drama up to Shakespeare (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1912), 9–10. Writing   in   the same 

84
                                         Shakespeare and Catholicism                                    75

year, C.  F. Tucker  Brooke claimed  that  the  Elizabethan  drama of  Peele, Kyd, 
and Marlowe   had  “enfranchised”  and  “emancipated” itself  from   “ecclesiastical 
tendencies” and “vassalage to the ancient church”. See The Tudor Drama: A History 
of English National Drama to the Retirement of Shakespeare (London: Constable & 
Co., 1912), 440.
         19. R.  M.  Frye characterises Shakespeare’s engagement with contemporary 
theology and religious practice in precisely this way. See R. M. Frye Shakespeare and 
Christian Doctrine (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963).
         20.  The   earliest  written   record  explicitly  to   connect  Shakespeare with 
Catholicism dates back to 1611, when the Protestant historian, John Speed, identified 
the author of Henry IV  (he does not actually name Shakespeare) as an associate of 
the Jesuit missionary, Robert Persons: “this Papist and his poet, of like conscience 
for lies, the one ever feigning  and the other ever falsifying  the truth”.  Quoted  by 
Peter Milward,    Shakespeare’s Religious Background (Chicago: Loyola University 
Press, 1975), 51. See also M.  Mutschman  and K.  Wentersdorf,  Shakespeare and 
Catholicism (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1952), 348, and Gary Taylor, “The Fortunes 
of Oldcastle”, Shakespeare Survey 38 (1985), 85–100, 97.
         21. For instance, see Milward, Shakespeare’s Religious Background, 15–23, and 
Mutschman and Wentersdorf, Shakespeare and Catholicism, 33–104.
         22.  See  E.   A.  J.  Honigmann,   Shakespeare: The “Lost” Years (2nd edn. 
Manchester: Manchester University  Press, 1998). Honigmann’s  study has  given 
rise to a great deal of research into the question of Shakespeare and Catholicism, 
centring in particular  on the  personal networks linking  Shakespeare’s family with 
well-known  Catholic  households from  Warwickshire  and  Lancashire. Much   of 
this work  was presented at the “Lancastrian Shakespeare” conference held at the 
University  of  Lancaster in  July  1999, subsequently published in   a two-volume 
collection edited by Richard Dutton,  Alison Findlay,  and Richard Wilson: Theatre 
and Religion: Lancastrian Shakespeare (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 
2003); and Region, Religion, and Patronage: Lancastrian Shakespeare (Manchester: 
Manchester University Press, 2003).
         23. See, for, instance, Mutschman and Wentersdorf, Shakespeare and Catholicism, 
209–319; Peter Milward, The Catholicism of Shakespeare’s Plays (Southampton: Saint 
Austin  Press, 1997); and  Velma Bourgeois  Richmond,  Shakespeare, Catholicism, 
and Romance (New York & London: Continuum, 2000). For a more sceptical view 
of Shakespeare’s Catholicism, see Michael Davies, “On this side Bardolatry: The 
Canonisation of the Catholic Shakespeare”, Cahiers Elisabéthains 58 (2000), 31–47, 
and Stanley Wells, Shakespeare for all Time (London: Macmillan, 2002), 23–36.
         24. The  attribution  of  the fresco cycle to Giotto  is  extremely controversial, 
as is the precise date of its composition (with estimates varying from the 1290s to 
the 1330s). For a brief  overview of this  critical  debate—often termed the  “Assisi 
problem”—see Adrian  S. Hoch,   “Master  of  the Legend  of  St  Francis”, in  The 
Dictionary of Art,  ed. Jane Turner, 34 vols., (London:  Macmillan,  1996), vol.  20, 
712–714.
         25. The Fresco Cycle in the Upper Church of Assisi is based on The Life of St 
Francis (the Legenda Major) by St Bonaventure, which was commissioned in 1260 
and completed in 1263. For his  account of Francis’s encounter with Innocent III, 
see Bonaventure, The Life of St Francis, trans. Ewert Cousins (New York: Paulist 
Press, 1978), ch. 3, 205–206.  A  similar  legend—once again involving  Innocent 
III—came  to be told about Francis’s contemporary, St Dominic, the founder of the 

85
76                                                   David Salter

other principal  mendicant  Order, the  Dominicans.  A  carved image of  Dominic 
supporting the crumbling edifice of the papal basilica forms part of a narrative cycle 
of the saint’s life decorating his tomb in the church of San Domenico, Bologna.
         26. For  a discussion of the part  played by the Papacy in the  history of  the 
Order, see John Moorman, A History of the Franciscan Order from Its Origins to the 
Year 1517 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968), passim; and C. F. Lawrence, The Friars: 
The Impact of the Early Mendicant Movement on Western Society (London: Longman, 
1994),181–201.
         27. The  extent to  which  the Papacy co-opted the Franciscan Order  for its 
own reforming ends is further suggested by an image from an altarpiece by Giotto 
roughly contemporary with the fresco cycle at Assisi, and currently in the  Louvre. 
The main  picture  portrays the  stigmatisation  of St  Francis, but  there are  three 
subsidiary images—or predelle—at the bottom of the  panel, one of  which is  The 
Dream of Innocent III. Although   on a miniature  scale, this  image resembles very 
closely the Assisi fresco, but with   one significant  addition.  St Peter can be seen 
standing over the sleeping figure of Innocent III,  gesturing towards St Francis and 
the crumbling basilica. So, the image implies, St Peter lends the full weight  of his 
authority to the approval of the Franciscan Order.
         28. The literature  on the early history of the Order—and the wider  conflicts 
within  the Church that its appearance generated—is extensive. A good overview of 
the subject can be found in Moorman, A History of the Franciscan Order, 123–139 and 
339–349; Lawrence, The Friars, 152–165; and Penn R. Szittya, The Antifraternal 
Tradition in   Medieval Literature  (Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press, 1986), 
1–182.
         29. For instance, see Arnold Williams, “Chaucer among the Friars”, Speculum 
28 (1953), 499–513; Jill Mann, Chaucer and Medieval Estates Satire: The Literature of 
Social Classes and the General Prologue to the Canterbury Tales (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University  Press, 1973), 37–54; Szittya,  The Antifraternal  Tradition  in  Medieval 
Literature, 183–287; and Lawrence M.  Clopper, “Songs of Rechelesnesse”: Langland 
and the Franciscans (Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1997).
         30. See Szittya, The Antifraternal Tradition in Medieval Literature, 7–9.
         31. Christopher Marlowe,  Dr  Faustus, ed. Roma Gill (2nd edition: London: 
A. &  C. Black, 1989).
         32. John Webster, The White Devil, ed. Christina Luckyj  (London:  A. &  C. 
Black, 1996), Act V.
         33.  Giovanni   Boccaccio, Decameron, a cura  di   Vittore   Branca (Torino: 
Einaudi, 1980), IV,  2,  487–504. For a modern English  translation,  see Giovanni 
Boccaccio, The Decameron, trans. G. H. McWilliam (2nd edition: Harmondsworth: 
Penguin, 1995), IV, 2, 301–312. For a discussion of the representation of friars in 
Italian novelle, see Robert J. Clements and Joseph Gibaldi, Anatomy of the Novella: 
The European Tale Collection from Boccaccio and Chaucer to Cervantes (New York: New 
York University Press, 1977), 183–215.
         34.  A  Critical  Edition  of  George Whetstone’s 1582 An Heptameron of Civil 
Discourses, ed. Diana Shklanka (New York & London: Garland, 1987), 120.
         35. An Heptameron of Civil Discourses, 121 (my italics). The tale has also been 

( reprinted by Pamela Benson in her collection Italian Tales from the Age of Shakespeare 
 London: J. M. Dent,  1996), 255–258. For a discussion of Whetstone’s Heptameron, 
see Thomas C. Izard, George Whetstone: Mid-Elizabethan Gentlemen of Letters (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1942), 80–130.

86
                                         Shakespeare and Catholicism                                    77



( 36.        All   quotations  are taken from  Jill  L.   Levenson, ed., Romeo and Juliet 
 Oxford: Oxford  University Press, 2000).
         37. For a discussion of the sources of Romeo and Juliet, see Geoffrey Bullough, 
Narrative  and Dramatic  Sources of Shakespeare, 8 vols. (London &  New  York: 
Routledge &  Kegan Paul &   Columbia  University Press, 1964), vol. 1,  269–283. 
Brooke’s poem is reprinted in the same volume, 284–363. The development of the 
legend is traced by Olin H. Moore, The Legend of Romeo and Juliet (Columbus: Ohio 
State University Press, 1950). For the versions of the story by da Porto and Bandello, 
see Luigi da Porto, “Istoria novellamente ritrovata di due nobili  amanti con la loro 
pietosa morte, intervenuta già nella città di Verona nel tempo del signor Bartolomeo 
dalla Scala”, in  Novellieri del Cinquecento, a cura di Marziano  Guglielminetti,   2 
vols. (Milano-Napoli:  Ricciardi,  1972), vol. 1, 241–288; and Matteo Bandello, “La 
sfortunata morte di  dui infelicissimi  amanti che l’uno  di veleno e l’altro  di dolore 
morirono, con  vari accidenti”,  in  Novelle di Matteo Bandello, a cura di  Guiseppe 
Guido Ferrero (Torino: UTET,  1978), 438–480. English translations of the earliest 
Italian and French versions of the story, including those of da Porto and Bandello, 
can be found in Nicole Prunster, trans. Romeo and Juliet before Shakespeare: Four Early 
Stories of Star Crossed Love (Toronto: CRRS Publications, 2000).
         38. See da Porto, 279, and Bandello, 475.
         39. See da Porto, 257, and Bandello, 450.
         40. See da Porto, 257, and Bandello, 450.
         41. In its mission to the towns and cities of Renaissance Italy, the Franciscan 
Order was much involved in  the resolution of disputes between rival families  and 
factions, a task that required that the friars’ detachment, neutrality, and freedom of 
association be respected. See Lawrence, The Friars, 113, and Cynthia L. Polecritti, 
Preaching Peace in Renaissance Italy: Bernardino of Siena and His Audience (Washington 
D.  C.:  The  Catholic  University  of  America  Press, 2000), 97–103. Shakespeare 
makes use of these characteristics in all three of his “Franciscan” plays.
         42. Arthur   Brooke, The Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Juliet, in Bullough, 
Narrative and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare, vol. 1, 284 (my italics).
         43. See Bullough, Narrative and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare, vol. 1, 277.
         44.  For  an alternative  view, which  sees Friar  Lawrence as a  much  more 
morally compromised figure, see Stevenson, Shakespeare’s Religious Frontier, 31–42, 
and James C. Bryant, “The Problematic Friar in  Romeo and Juliet”, English Studies 
55 (1974), 340–350.
         45. For a discussion of the sources of Much Ado about Nothing, see Charles T. 
Prouty, The Sources of Much Ado about Nothing (New Haven & London: Harvard 
University Press, 1950), and Geoffrey Bullough, Narrative and Dramatic Sources of 
Shakespeare, vol. 2, 61–81. For Bullough’s translation of the novella (Novella XXII 
from La Prima Parte de le Novelle del Bandello), see 112–134.
         46.  Joseph Campbell, The Hero with   a Thousand Faces (London: Fontana 
Press, 1993), 10.
         47. All   quotations are taken  from  Sheldon P. Zitner,  ed., Much Ado about 
Nothing (Oxford: Oxford University  Press, 1993).
         48. Cited by R. S. White, “Let Wonder Seem Familiar”: Endings in Shakespeare’s 
Romance Vision (London: Athlone, 1985), 3.
         49. Bullough, Narrative and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare, vol. 2, 77.
         50. For instance, see Northrop Frye, A Natural Perspective: The Development of 
Shakespearean Comedy and Romance (New York: Columbia University Press, 1965); 

87
78                                                   David Salter

and The Myth of Deliverance: Reflections on Shakespeare’s Problem Comedies (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 1983).
         51. Frye, A Natural Perspective, 125.
         52.  Fora  detailed  examination of   the  sources and analogues of  Measure 
for Measure, see Bullough, Narrative and  Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare, vol. 2, 
399–417.

( 53.        All  quotations are taken from  N.  W.  Bawcutt, ed., Measure for Measure 
 Oxford: Oxford  University Press, 1991).
         54. For a detailed discussion of the Duke’s adoption of the friar’s disguise, and 
the complications it raises, see Rosalind Miles, The Problem of Measure for Measure: 
An Historical Investigation (London: Vision Press, 1976), 161–196.
         55. Rosalind Miles has made this point in relation to Measure for Measure. See 
Miles, The Problem of Measure for Measure, 168–169.
         56. The strongly nostalgic element to Shakespeare’s friars has been noted by, 
amongst others, Peter Milward   in his  Shakespeare’s Religious Background, 78. On 
the more general associations between nostalgia and Catholicism in Shakespeare, 
see Gary  Taylor, “Forms  of   Opposition:  Shakespeare and Middleton”,   English 
Literary Renaissance 24 (1994), 283–314, 311; Arthur  F.  Moretti,   “Shakespeare 
and Catholicism”,   in  Dutton,   Findlay,   and Wilson,   ed.  Theatre and  Religion, 
218–241, 228; and Eamon Duffy,  “Bare ruined  choirs: remembering Catholicism 
in Shakespeare’s England”, Dutton, Findlay, and Wilson, ed. Theatre and Religion, 
40–57.

88
                              WILLIAM        M.   McKIM


                Romeo’s   “Death-markt”         Imagination  
                         and   Its  Tragic    Consequences




In   the long history of Romeo and Juliet criticism, writers have paid insuf-
ficient attention to the differences between the ways the two protagonists 
imagine themselves as being in love and the tragic significance of those 
differences. In many critical accounts, the assumption has been that, as the 
two confront obstacles to their marital success, they counter what G. K. 
Hunter calls a “rhetoric of society” with a shared voice, a “radiant poetry” 
that is expressive of their mutually felt desires and outlook (120). Marianne 
Novy, a contemporary scholar who writes about gender construction as a 
societal process and its potentially destructive consequences, nevertheless 
sees Romeo and Juliet as moving toward a “mutuality in love” during the 
course of their play and Romeo’s love of Juliet as constituting not only “a 
challenge to the feud” but also to the “associations of masculinity and sexu-

“ ality with violence” (106) that we hear in the Capulet servant’s boasts about 
 thrusting” Montague’s “maids to the wall” (1.1.18) and Mercutio’s gibes 
about pricking love “for pricking” and beating “love down” (1.4.28).
       Other longstanding critical assumptions consistent with this perception 
of Romeo and Juliet possessing a shared point of view about what it means to 
be in love are, first, that, by acting decisively to the report of Juliet’s death in 
Act Five, Romeo demonstrates that, as M. M. Mahood puts it, he has made 
a successful “rite of passage” from “dream into reality,” and, secondly, that we 


Kentucky Philological Review, Volume 20, Numbers 4–5 (March 2005): pp. 38–45. Copyright 
© 2005 Kentucky Philological Association.

                                                   79

89
80                                        William M. McKim

as audience end up seeing their self-inflicted deaths as, paradoxically, a “vic-
tory,” not only over time and society but over the possibility of inner hostility 
towards each other (398). Northrop  Frye, in this  regard, says we come to 
realize, through their sacrifices, that “nothing perfect or without blemish can 
stay that way in this world and should be offered up to another world before 
it deteriorates” (32).
       Such widely shared sentiments encourage us to reward the play more as 
lyric triumph than tragedy and, unfortunately, fail to do justice to its psycho-

“ logical and cultural complexity. Rather than presenting us with an uplifting 
 marriage of two minds” and  mutual self-sacrifice, as these readings imply, 
Romeo and Juliet illustrate radically different perceptions toward each other 
and the world, differences that become more evident to us as the play goes 
on, particularly as we note the disparity between their dying speeches. My 
contentions in this paper are, first, that, rooted in Romeo’s poetic conception 
of what it means to be in love, his imagination of himself being a lover, is a 
culturally-induced desire for manly, even heroic, attainment through loving 
that overrides any anticipation on his part for happiness, personal intimacy, 
or long-term relationship; second, that Romeo’s poetic desire for achievement 
through loving is reflective of a masculine anxiety about worthiness, i.e. being 
perceived as worthy by himself and others, that is characteristic of the play’s 
males in general, from those who pick fights in the streets, ridicule love, or use 
their parental and aristocratic status to exercise power over others; third, that 
this masculine or worthiness anxiety, which links Romeo to male attitudes 
in his society, is presented as a formative cause of his and Juliet’s untimely 
deaths; and finally, that his “death-marked” imagination, an imagination di-
rected toward violent encounters and self-enhancement through self-sacrifice, 
is already formed, even scripted, before the action of the play begins and does 
not significantly change during the course of the play.1 By contrast, Juliet’s 
poetic imagination, as reflected in her lyric expressions of what it means to be 
in love with Romeo, is radically free of this self-regarding concern with her 
own worthiness or personal attainment but is instead characterized by desires 
for earthly happiness, sexuality, and day-to-day intimacy.
       A  misleading image of  Romeo that persists in  the popular imagina-
tion, and that is perpetuated in many stage and screen productions, is that of 
an extraordinarily genteel youth, free of masculine anxieties and tendencies 
toward violence that are a product of these anxieties. As a corrective to this 
stereotype, we might consider Romeo’s actions and speeches in the play as 
mirroring, not counteracting, the competitive atmosphere of his society as a 
whole. In doing so, we might note that his actions and speeches, like those 
of other male characters in the play, are characterized by recurrent variations 
on the trope of “standing”: standing up, standing out, and standing in for. For 
example, at the beginning of the play, Sampson, the Capulet servant, brags 

90
                                Romeo’s “Death-markt” Imagination                       81

that he is “able to stand,” as long as his “naked weapon is out” (1.1.28, 34), 
and with his other standing weapon he will “thrust [Montague’s] maids to the 
wall” (16) just as assuredly he will “back” (35) or stand in for his fellow servant 
and fellow fighter, Gregory, against the Montague servants.
       We  see a similar pattern repeated, with Romeo involved, later in the 
climactic duel scene in Act Three. Tybalt prides himself on standing out in his 
society as a quarreler, so he stands up against Romeo and issues him a written 
challenge to duel. Mercutio, who has proclaimed that those, like Tybalt, who 
try to stand out through dueling are nothing but  “fashionmongers” (2.3.33) 
but who himself has no hesitation about himself trying to stand out as a wit 
(as Romeo describes him: “A gentleman . . . that loves to hear himself talk, and 
will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month” [147–149]), un-
characteristically decides to stand up for Romeo’s life and honor, and perhaps 
even his love for him, against Tybalt.2 When Romeo realizes that Mercutio 
has sacrificed himself by standing in for him and his cause of honor, he de-

“ clares his “reputation stain’d” (3.1.111), his having been made “effeminate” by 
 Juliet’s beauty” (114) , so, capitulating to the pressure to perform his manly 
duty under the imagined gaze of his friend, “for  Mercutio’s soul /  Is but a 
little way above our heads” (126–127), staying for revenge, he stands up for 
Mercutio by killing Tybalt.
       Romeo’s violent and catastrophic response in this scene we may see as 
prefiguring his hasty and misguided response, at the end of the play, when 
he hears the false report of Juliet’s death. Imagining himself subjected to the 
eyewitnessing presence of his dead Juliet, as he previously was to that of Mer-
cutio, “Well, Juliet, I will lie  with thee, tonight” (5.1.34), he, like the worthy 
lover he imagines himself to be, manfully stands up for her, by violently chal-
lenging death, her imagined adversary: “Thou detestable maw, thou womb of 
death / . . .Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open, / And in despite I’ll cram 
thee with more food” (5.3.45, 47–48).
       The intertwined  and interconnected nature of these actions is the con-
sequence of already scripted cultural codes of honor  that  encourage acts 
of violence, including self-sacrifice, as proof of manliness, worthiness, and 
constancy. The Montague-Capulet feud, in light of this recurrent pattern, is 
shown to be more symptom than cause of a more broadly cultural mindset, 
the erecting, defending, and promoting of  one’s house serving as a means 
of standing tall against rivals, and other aggressive efforts to stand tall and 
stand above, whether through building, fighting, sarcastic discourse, or sex-
ual conquest, functioning as invitations for put-downs and knockdowns of 
various sorts.
       Seen against these patterns of cultural influence and corresponding be-
haviors, the characterization of Romeo emerges more as an epitome of his 
society than a counter to it. As we have seen his masculine anxiety emerge 

91
82                                        William M. McKim

with a vengeance in his compulsion to fight Tybalt for a cause and to castigate 
Juliet’s beauty for making him “effeminate,” we see Romeo, throughout the 
play, set forth in a defensive and competitive context. Lady Capulet proclaims 
about Romeo at the masked ball that “Verona brags of him” (1.5.64), and his 
father, Montague, says that he expects him to “spread his sweet leaves to the 
air” and “dedicate his beauty to the sun” (1.1.145–146), in other words stand 
out among the rest of Verona’s young men as the beautiful person his father 
imagines him and wants him to  be. When we first see Romeo in the play, 
though he has cultivated an image of himself as suffering recluse, his dis-
course in the streets is not humble and self-effacing, as we might expect from 
such a pretense, but is characterized instead by an assertive and showy display 

. of witty images and paradoxes: “Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs 
 . . What is it else? A madness most discreet / A choking gall and a preserv-
ing sweet” (1.1.190, 195–194). When talking about his beloved Rosalind, he 
is not modest but boasting and eloquent. She is “rich in beauty,” she “hath 
Dian’s wit” (202) and “will not stay the siege of loving terms” (209), and “the 
all-seeing sun / Ne’er saw her match since first the world begun” (1.2.92–93). 
Although he  represents himself poetically as defeated in not being able to 
satisfy his desires, he is, based on that suffering, all the more worthy of admi-
ration since his constancy is “devout religion,” standing out above the fickle 
weakness of “transparent heretics” (88, 91) who haven’t the strength to be so 
self-sacrificing.
       Whether  in the spirit of play or seriousness or some of both, we see him, 
throughout the first two acts, translating emotion into displays of public wit, 
delivered like thrusts in a duel, so aggressively and skillfully that even Mer-
cutio cannot keep up with him: “Come between us, good Benvolio. My wit 
faints” (2.4.67). Furthermore, we see this competitive concern with present-
ing a manly and worthy image of himself persist to the end of the play when, 
just before he enters Juliet’s tomb with the intention of lying next to her in 

“ death, he gives his servant a letter, a kind of “suicide note,” to be delivered to 
 my lord and father,” presumably in an attempt to justify his seemingly mad 
actions as noble and dutiful, not simply rebellious and willful, comparable to 
Hamlet’s dying charge to Horatio that his friend present his “cause aright” to 
the “unsatisfied.”
       Reflective of  this self-regarding and self-promoting  bent in  Romeo’s 
characterization is the learnedly bookish shaping of his imagination,  bor-
rowing not  only from  the Petrarchan sonnet tradition (“now  is he for  the 
numbers Petrarch flowed  in,”  says Mercutio  [2.4.38–39]), but  also Pla-
tonism, and the medieval literature of chivalric romance, all of which tend 
to represent the suffering of the lover as a means of moral improvement and 
self-transcendence more than experienced earthly happiness. His turning to 
poetry as his major occupation, “feigning notable images,” according to Sir 

92
                                Romeo’s “Death-markt” Imagination                       83

Philip Sidney’s famous and current definition, that are capable of construct-
ing in words a “golden world” superior to the natural one, coupled with his 
dream-supported tendency to play out his  poetry in  real life, as noted by 
Mercutio in  his “Queen Mab”  speech, reflects an ambitious and idealizing 

“ mind wanting to live not  in  nature or on  the earth, but  above it, to  live 
 within  the zodiac of his own wit,” as Sidney puts it.3
       This idealizing, and, as I argue, fatal tendency in Romeo’s imagination 
is reflected in the way it constructs larger than life roles for himself and his 
lady, and the adversaries that threaten them, reaching outward and upward, 
above the earth, toward myth and myth-making.4 Coleridge, in writing about 
Romeo, notes this tendency when he describes him as motivated by a self- 
directed desire of the noble mind for one’s “whole being to be united to some-
thing or  some being felt necessary for its completeness” (134), So whether 
Romeo is describing Rosalind or Juliet, it is her youthful “beauty,” a Platonic 
absolute abstracted from the matrix of nature and temporarily incarnated in a 
living being, not her living person, that he uses as a referent in his poetizing, 
and that beauty is always characterized, ominously and prophetically, as be-
longing above the earth, in some remote and exalted sphere: “Beauty too rich 
for   “ use, for earth too dear” (1.5.47).
         Devout religion” (1.2.88), which seeks some perfection and some sta-
tus beyond the earth not on it, is the primary context within which his love 
is imagined. He carries this prescribed association over to his meeting with 
Juliet at Capulet’s ball when he characterizes her body as a shrine and himself 
a saint, himself implicitly as a religious pilgrim. All the images he uses to de-
scribe her, in this as in subsequent scenes, are extraterrestrial and competitive 
in their implication. Her abstracted beauty always stands above, “a snowy dove 
trooping with crows / As yonder lady o’er her fellows shows” (1.5.48–49), “a 
bright angle . . . being o’er my head / As is a winged messenger of heaven / 
Unto the white-upturned wond’ring eyes / Of mortals that fall back to gaze 
on him . . .” (2.2.26–30), and a “fair sun,” drawing envy from the moon, whom 
she has the power to kill with her rising (2.2.3–6).
       All   of  these images serve implicitly   to  exalt  the  poet-lover in  his 
own imagination  and constitute a  kind  a kind  of  self-fashioning or self- 
transformation, as he characterizes himself as empowered, lifted above the 
earth, by his affection for her and, even more, by her affection for him,  as 
if it  were an inspiration from  a muse or an act of divine grace. As his lady 
is made to play a personified role in  his imagination, that  of ideal Beauty 
which diminishes by comparison all that is earthly, so is he, by implication, 
exalted into a mythological role himself, that of  Love, the aspiring quester 
after beauty, given superhuman powers of his own by beauty’s powerful influ-
ence: “Call me but love and I’ll be new baptized. / Henceforth I never will be 
Romeo” (2.2.49–50) and “With love’s light wings did I o’erperch these walls, / 

93
84                                        William M. McKim

For stony limits  cannot hold love out, /  And  what love dares do that love 
attempt. / Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me” (66–69). “For valour, is 
not Love  a Hercules[?]” (LLL  4.3.337), as Berowne, one of Shakespeare’s 
previously created poet-lovers, proclaims. Because such beauty incarnated on 
earth, poetically and mythically speaking, is constantly threatened and in-
evitably doomed, a recurrent theme in Shakespeare’s sonnets, the myth or 
waking dream created and lived out by the lover-poet is inevitably tragic and 
emotionally disturbing. Therefore, it is fitting that Romeo envision himself as 
a ship-tossed, and finally, shipwrecked sailor, the vessel propelling him on his 
imperiled quest being steered by an unknown but life-threatening pilot: “But 

“ He that hath the steerage of my course / Direct my [sail]!” (1.4.112–113) and 
 Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on / The dashing rocks thy sea-sick 
weary bark!” (5.3.117–118).
       Where  in myth  or poetry there is such supreme, standout beauty and 
aspiring love, there is inevitably an envious threat, Orpheus and Eurydice, 
Proserpine and Dis, and Milton’s Adam and Eve being prime examples. So 
the perilous sense of being threatened, of a struggle, becomes an essential 
part of the script that is played out in Romeo’s dreams and poetry. Stephen 
Greenblatt, who made popular the word self-fashioning as a major focus of 
early modern critical studies, stated as a principle that literary self-fashioning 
is always “achieved in relation to something perceived as alien, strange or 
hostile,” some “threatening other” (3). For Romeo the threatening other is less 
Juliet’s kinsmen, unworthy of his overreaching and self-glorifying imagina-
tion, but rather personified cosmic forces: “some consequence yet hanging in 
the stars” (1.4.107); Fortune, which he fears would make him her “fool,” not 
the hero or worthy knight he aspires to be; or death itself, personified either 
as a beauty-devouring “beast” or a rival lover. Courage, willingness to sacri-
fice oneself for love, and fidelity, more than long term pleasure or a growing 
marital relationship, constitute success in such a myth. Beauty incarnated is 
doomed on earth, but “come what sorrow can” let “love-devouring death do 
what he dare” (2.6.3, 7) as Romeo says immediately before his wedding to 
Juliet, “one short minute in her sight” and his right to “call her mine,” is, as he 
confesses to Friar Laurence, “enough” (5, 8).
       Thus,  in  Romeo’s poetic  constructions, behind   every transcendent 
imagining of  Juliet’s beauty, and himself a  successful lover, there lurks a 
doom-directed image of some transcendent adversary that is his enemy, that 
calls upon his soul to encounter, to take arms or poetic voice against. Tragi-
cally, we see this already scripted, yet self-constructed, myth acted out to its 
prescribed conclusion in Romeo’s final speech, characteristically a soliloquy, 
over Juliet’s body in the tomb. By violence against himself, in the “feasting 
presence” (5.3.86) of light cast by Juliet’s still-preserved beauty, an echo of his 
earlier image, in the balcony scene, of Juliet as the sun with power to kill the 

94
                                Romeo’s “Death-markt” Imagination                       85

envious moon, Romeo plays out his already scripted hero’s part: “here / will I 
set up my everlasting rest, / And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars / From 
this world-wearied flesh” (109–112).
       At   this most tragic  and error-filled  moment in  the play, Romeo can 
respond paradoxically, with triumphant assertions more than expressions of 
grief, because, as we have seen, his poetic imagination, which has entirely tak-
en over his discourse at this point, measures success in love not as happiness 
but as achievement and worthiness. In his own eyes, he has achieved much. 
He has not only proved his constancy in love by dying for his beloved, the lit-
mus test of the poet-lover, but he has saved her beauty from being conquered 
by himself experiencing the sublimity of that “one short minute” in her sight 
he spoke of just before his wedding: “Death, that hath suck’d the honey of thy 
breath, / Hath had no power yet upon they beauty. / Thou art not conquer’d, 
beauty’s engin yet / Is crimson in thy lips and cheeks, / And death’s pale flag 
is not advanced there” (92–96).
       Juliet too  is given a poetic voice in the play and a poetic imagination, 
but, unlike Romeo’s, they are not fully developed or already scripted before 
the action of the play begins, nor is her poetry shaped, as Romeo’s is, from 
bookish sources, which prescribe love as a vehicle for worthiness more than 
happiness. Rather, we see her lyric voice, beginning with the balcony scene 
(2.2), in the process of formation, so much so that it could be argued that, 
whereas Romeo’s love for Juliet is a construction of his poetry, Juliet’s poetry 
is a construction of her love, or, more specifically, her anticipation of hap-
piness through loving Romeo as a person, not an ideal. Her lyric speeches 
are always reflective of fresh discovery, not literary or mythic borrowing. For 
example, just before Romeo leaves her that night of their first meeting, she 
playfully constructs images that express her desires for physical closeness, not 
personal achievement. Significantly, they are not cosmic and transcendent, 
like Romeo’s images of her beauty, but domestic and earth-directed. In her 
imagination Romeo would be, not a star or the sun, but a tamed falcon, and 
her only imagined heroics would be for a voice powerful enough to “lure his 
tassel-gentle back again” (2.2.159) when, if necessary, he must depart. Or, 
in a similar image, Romeo would be a pet bird that a child would have on a 
string, so she could always be able to pull him closer to her. Her main fear, in 
this domestic scenario, is not some cosmic adversary but her own unbounded 
desire for physical intimacy: if he were a bird, she might physically “kill” him, 
she says playfully, with too “much cherishing” (182).
       As  Edward Snow, in an influential  article points out,  this tender and 

“ playful physicality is outside the range of Romeo’s poetic discourse, because. 
 his desire is operated by eyesight” (170), almost exclusively.5 Where Romeo, 
for example, personifies the sea as a threatening alien force driving him to 
shipwreck and death, Juliet personalizes it and internalizes it, in an optimistic 

95
86                                        William M. McKim

sense, as an image of her newly discovered capacities for loving: “My bounty 
is as boundless as the sea, / My love as deep; the more I give to thee, / The 
more I have, for both are infinite” (133–135).
       Later  in  the play, after the wedding but before its sexual consumma-
tion, in Juliet’s most mythopoeic and full-throated speech, “Gallop apace, you 
fiery-footed steeds” (3.2.1 ff.), we see these personalizing, familiarizing, and 
domesticating tendencies at work. It is a speech, virtually unique in  all of 
Shakespeare’s works, in which sexual desire is expressed without ironic un-
dertones of guilt or shame.6 Romeo, lacking a physical or tactile component to 
his poetic imagination, does not come close. Like Romeo, Juliet too sees their 
love as set against night and the surrounding darkness, but, unlike Romeo in 
his grandiose personifications of sorrow, “love-devouring death,” fortune, and 
the stars, she door not see the night as alien and adversarial, a call to arms, but 
as a familiar and potentially friendly spirit.  “Civil  night” (10), she calls her, 
one she might bargain and negotiate, not fall into combat, with: “Spread thy 
curtain, love-performing night” (5), so we can have privacy for lovemaking. 
Most of all, as she says to this imaginary folk spirit, “Give me my Romeo, and, 
when I die / Take him and cut him out in little stars . . .” (21–22), and then, if 
you wish, you may use his brightness to compete with and outshine the “gar-
ish sun” (25). In Juliet’s imaginary world, goddesses and spirits may compete 
with each other for status and rank, but she doesn’t feel a need to, and, in her 
poetry, she can represent her sexual dying joyfully and gratefully as a spiritu-
ally assisted experience and her physical death acceptingly as part of a natural 
process, not grandiosely as a violent mythic encounter.
       As  in the balcony scene, we see Juliet, in this speech, using earthly and 
domestic, not extraterrestrial, images to define what it means to be in love. 
She is the buyer of a house who has not yet “possess’d it,” a sold house that 
has not yet been “enjoy’d” and “an impatient child”  who has received new 
clothes but has yet to “wear them” (26–31). Juliet’s images of herself as want-
ing to be enjoyed, of discovering within her a capacity to love Romeo that 
is an bounteous as the sea, is foreign to Romeo’s self-centered preoccupa-
tion with individual  attainments. Once again, as in the balcony scene, we see 
Juliet portraying herself as a child, not in the sense of being subservient or 
simpleminded but in her unspoiled capacity to desire and experience physical 
pleasure without shame. In this same speech, she also presents herself and 
Romeo as virgin lovers playing in a non-competitive game where, as she clev-
erly puts it, they will  both  win by losing. An  image like this one stands in 
contrast to the competitive and defensive bent of most of Romeo’s discourse, 
as does her image, also in this speech, of Romeo’s beauty lying “upon the 
wings of night, /  Whiter  than new  snow upon a raven’s back” (19). In this 
comparison, we may hear the reverse echo of an image Romeo used when he 
first saw Juliet: “So shows a snowy dove stooping with crows / As yonder lady 

96
                                Romeo’s “Death-markt” Imagination                       87

o’er her fellows shows” (1.5.48–49). In Juliet’s imagination of Romeo’s beauty, 
white set against surrounding darkness is not one of competition or threat 
but aesthetic concord and harmony; by contrast, in Romeo’s image of Juliet’s 
beauty, the black crows are being put clown in a competitive beauty contest.
       It   is tempting, with  respect to this  play, which has often been char-
acterized as a comedy gone wrong, to see Juliet as representing the comic 
imagination, directed toward envisioning and pursuing happiness through 
love, while Romeo illustrates the hubristic, if noble, imagination of the tragic 
overreacher, whose preoccupation with his own attainments and worthiness 
points toward self-destruction. If Juliet’s words, “I must hear from thee every 
day in the hour, /  For in  a minute there are many days” (3.5.44–45) seem 
anticipatory of the deconstructive Rosalind in As You Like It, we might imag-
ine her transforming Romeo’s scripted and death-marked imagination, given 
leisurely time and pastoral location, as the comedy, As You Like It provides.
       On  two brief and muted occasions in Romeo and Juliet, we hear Juliet ap-
plying Rosalind-like correctives to Romeo’s preoccupations and anxieties. The 
first example is immediately before their wedding, when she refuses Romeo’s 
request to “blazon” with “rich music’s tongue” (2.6.26–27) her “joy” at “this 
dear encounter” (29), in other words, construct some hyperbolic poetry of her 

“ own to counter what she senses in Romeo as a potentially destructive anxiety, 
 if the measure of thy joy / Be heaped like mine” (24–25). Instead of comply-
ing with Romeo’s request, she responds with an eloquent questioning of any 
need for grandiose and self-justifying rhetoric: “They are but beggars that can 
count their worth, / But my true love is grown to such excess / I cannot sum 
up sum of half my wealth” (32–34). The second example of Juliet serving as 
gentle critic is immediately after their  sexual consummation, when Romeo 
expresses his willingness to stay with her in bed past the coming of dawn, not 
for the purpose of continuing their lovemaking, as Juliet initially expresses a 
desire for, but to remain in danger and so die for her if she “wilt-have it so” 
(3.5.18). Against what she infers as his potentially destructive need to prove 
himself to her by dying of love (“Come, death, and welcome. Juliet wills it so” 
[24]), she speaks up on behalf of a comic, not tragic, scenario: “Hie, hence, be 
gone, away!” (26), and let’s try to live for love.
       Whereas Romeo’s poetizing persists throughout the play and reaches its 
grand climax in his dying speech, which triumphantly proclaims a symbolic 
victory over death, time, fortune, and his stars, Juliet’s lyric voice, character-
istically, is last heard in the play the night of her lovemaking with the living 
Romeo. Tragically, she has no triumphal self-fashioning, death speech of her 
own to match or compete with Romeo’s 36-line soliloquy. “Then I’ll be brief ” 
(5.3.168) is the sum of her epitaph; “thy lips are warm” (167) is her modest, 
earthy consolation. “No more to build on there,” she might well have said in 
a different poem at a different time.

97
88                                             William  M.  McKim

                                                         Notes

         1.  “Masculine  anxiety”  is  an established term  in  Shakespearian criticism, 
linked  largely, but  not  exclusively, with  feminist  approaches. Valerie Traub, for 
example, states that the feminist perspective is “concerned with male anxiety toward 
woman’s eroticism and the maternal body” (4–5), both of which are regarded with 
suspicion and implicit disgust by patriarchal culture, as represented in Shakespeare’s 
tragedies. Janet Adelman, focusing on the later tragedies from Macbeth to Coriolanus, 
sees masculine identity as something constructed to “ward off vulnerability to  the 
mother” as psychologically constructed (134). Bruce Smith, who  ranges in survey 
fashion across the breadth of the topic  of  masculinity in  Shakespeare, represents 
masculinity in  early modern literature as a perilously slippery construction, not an 
essence. Mark Breitenberg, citing unequal distribution  of power  in society as the 

“ basis for masculine anxiety being a universal phenomenon, so far as to state that 
 men anxious about their  masculinity  will  [always] be a  necessary and inevitable 
condition of masculinity”  (qtd. In  Wells, 213). For the most part,  Romeo and Juliet 
has been excluded from or de-emphasized in these discussions, although Coppelia 
Kahn, by distinguishing between two cultural  constructions of what it means to be 
manly, one the sanctioned public way productive of anxiety about individuality and 
maternal separation, the other a private commitment to fulfilling the duties of being 

( a husband, sees Romeo as “ultimately choosing against the sanctioned public way” 
 89). Clearly, I see Ms. Kahn as overstating her case here.
         2.  Mercutio’s  symbolic  linkage   with   masculine anxiety   is  illustrated  in 
Roger Allam’s comments about playing the role in John Caird’s Royal Shakespeare 

( production, 1983–1984. For Allam’s Mercutio, Romeo has been “unmanned by love” 
 Players 118) and is becoming increasingly separated from his former friend. Allam, 

( therefore, sees Mercutio’s purpose in the duel scene as piling up “an emotional debt” 
 119) that will  force Romeo to act worthily  on his behalf. In  addition, we may see 
Mercutio’s example of self-sacrifice for love as pointing toward Romeo’s dying for 
Juliet, a connection reinforced by the  way his name seemingly alludes to the god 
Mercury in his  role as psychopomp, a messenger who directs souls to the land of the 
dead (Porter 104). Two productions of the  play in 1994, one directed in  England 
by Neil Bartlett,   the other in  Germany by Karen Bier, emphasize this connection 
between Mercutio and Romeo’s being marked for death, by having the same actor 
who played Mercutio  continually  reappear later in  the  play in  such roles as the 
Apothecary, Friar John, and Romeo’s servant, Balthazar (Holland 224, 269).
         3. In  1595, projected as a reasonable date for the composition of Romeo and 
Juliet by several modern editors, two  editions of  Sidney’s Apology for Poetry were 
published. Considered as a discourse on poetry’s enflaming and shaping power over 
human minds at  least as much as a defense of its capacity for teaching morality, 
Apology functions well as a commentary on the way poetry and poetry-making are 
represented in both Romeo and Juliet and A Midsummer Night’s Dream. In particular, 
Sidney’s language about the  poet’s being  “lifted   up” by  the  “vigor  of  his  own 
invention” and, in the process, making things “quite anew, forms such as never were 
in nature as the Heroes, Demigods,  Cyclops, Chimeras, Furies . .  .” (14), applies 
to Romeo’s poetizing, especially as characterized by Mercutio in his “Queen Mab” 
speech, as well as to Theseus’s argument in A Midsummer Night’s Dream linking “the 
poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling”  (5.1.12) with  madness (See Forrest Robinson’s 
note, 14). Sidney’s Apology is also useful to apply  to Romeo and Juliet because it 

98
                                   Romeo’s “Death-markt” Imagination                                 89

identifies poetic discourse with other types of making, building on its etymological 
origins in the word poiein (12), that men in Verona, not women, are free to practice 
in competitive ways.
         4. In her introduction  to the Oxford edition  of Romeo and Juliet, Jill Levenson 
goes so far as to say that “the primary source of the Romeo and Juliet fiction is myth” 
and Liebestod, the name Richard Wagner applied to his opera Tristan and Isolde, as 

“ the particular myth that “informs” it (2). Denis de Rougemont calls Romeo and Juliet 
 the most magnificent  resuscitation of [this] myth  that the  world was to be given” 
until  Wagner (190). Comparing  Shakespeare’s play to the Liebestod is, of course, 
suggestive but has proved somewhat misleading. First, the comparison ignores the 
important distinction  between the romantic retelling of  a myth, as you have in the 
Wagner opera, and the social focus on myth making that we are presented with in 
the play. Why Romeo’s suicide is driven by destructive myth making but not Juliet’s 
is a question the comparison does not address. The comparison also implies that the 
motivation for  Romeo’s suicide is uncontrollable erotic  passion, an interpretation 
contradicted by the performative nature of his dying  soliloquy and, as I argue, his 
anxious and self-centered desire to present himself as a worthy lover.
         5. Snow’s insightful analysis of the differences in Romeo and Juliet’s discourse 
is, for the most part, supportive of my conclusions in this paper, though he assumes, 
as I  do not,  that  they  “share an imaginative  vision”  (168). But  his  point  about 
their  representing two contrasting  modes of  desire, Romeo “reaching out”  after 
something always at a distance, thereby imagining peak performances or attainments 
accompanied by a falling off, Juliet “unfolding” from within, from bud to flower over 
time (178), is essential in helping to define their opposing points of view.
         6. The  point of view toward  sexuality in this speech, as well as Juliet’s other 
lyric expressions in acts two  and three, in  contrast with  Romeo’s mythologizing, 
can be seen as ref lective of Rianne Eisler’s argument, in Sacred Pleasure and other 
books, that the idea of sexuality being regarded as sacramental, bespeaking “a view 
of the world  in  which everything  is spiritual  . .  . and the  whole world is  imbued 
with the sacred” (57), has been overthrown and usurped in Western culture by the 
sacralization of pain and violence and, particularly  applicable to Romeo and Juliet, 
the “need for glorification built  into myths of struggle in which cosmic forces, good 
and evil, beauty and darkness, eternity and time,  God  and the devil,  are seen in 
perpetual conflict” (381).

                                                 Works       Cited 

Adelman, Janet. Suffocating Mothers: Fantasies of Maternal Origins in Shakespeare’s Plays, 
         “Hamlet” to “The Tempest.” New York: Routledge, 1991.
Coleridge’s Writings on Shakespeare. Terence Hawks, ed. New York: Capricorn Books, 1959.
Eisler, Rianne. Sacred Pleasure: Sex, Myth, and the Politics of the Body. San Francisco: Harper 
         Collins, 1995.
Greenblatt, Stephen. Renaissance Self-fashioning from More to Shakespeare. Chicago: University 
         of Chicago Press, 1980.
Holland, Peter. English Shakespeare: Shakespeare on the English Stage in the 1990s. Cambridge 
         and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Hunter, G. K. “Shakespeare and the Traditions of Tragedy.” In The Cambridge Companion 
         to Shakespeare. Stanley Wells, ed. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University 
         Press, 1986. 123–141.

99
90                                                   William    M.  McKim


Kahn,  Coppelia.  Man’s Estate: Masculine Identity  in  Shakespeare. Berkeley: University of 
          California  Press, 1981. 
Mahood,  M.    M.   “Romeo  and  Juliet.”   In  Essays in  Shakespearean Criticism. James L. 
          Calderwood  and Harold  E. Toliver,  eds. Englewood Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice Hall,  1970. 
          391–404. 
Northrop Frye on Shakespeare. Robert Sandler, ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
          1986.
Novy,  Marianne.   Love’s Argument: Gender Relations in   Shakespeare. Chapel Hill,   NC: 
          University  of North  Carolina Press, 1984.
Players of Shakespeare 2: Further Essays in Shakespearean Performance by Players with the Royal 
          Shakespeare Company. Russell Jackson and Robert Smallwood, eds. Cambridge and 
          New  York: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Porter, Joseph. Shakespeare’s Mercutio: His History and Drama. Chapel Hill, NC: University of 
          North  Carolina  Press, 1988.
Rougement, Denis de. Love in the Western World. rev. ed. Montgomery Belgion, trans. New 
          York: Princeton  University Press, 1983.
Shakespeare, William. The Riverside Shakespeare. 2nd. ed. G. Blakemore Evans, ed. Boston: 
          Houghton  Mifflin,    1997. All quotations are taken from this  edition.
——— . Romeo and Juliet, Jill L. Levenson, ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Sidney, Sir Philip.  An  Apology for Poetry. Forrest G. Robinson, ed. New York:  Macmillan, 
          1970. 
Smith, Bruce  R. Shakespeare and Masculinity. Oxford Shakespeare Topics. Oxford: Oxford 
          University  Press, 2000.
Snow, Edward. “Language and Sexual Difference in  Romeo and Juliet,” Shakespeare’s Rought 
          Magic.  Peter Erickson  and  Coppelia  Kahn,  eds. Newark:   University  of  Delaware 
          Press / London: Associated University Presses, 1985. 168–192.
Traub, Valerie. Desire and Anxiety: Circulations of Sexuality in Shakespearean Drama. London: 
          Routledge, 1992.
Wells, Robin Headlam.  Shakespeare and Masculinity. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge 
          University  Press, 2000.

100
 ROBERT      N.   WATSON      AND    STEPHEN       DICKEY


                          Wherefore    Art    Thou  Tereu?  
                       Juliet    and   the  Legacy   of  Rape 





                                         1. The Balcony
To    take Juliet’s “Wherefore art thou Romeo?” as a practical question 
about location is a notorious and vulgar error. Yet her next question might 
justifiably be, “Wherefore art thou where thou art?” That is the distinct 
implication of her next “wherefore”—“How camest thou hither, tell me, 
and wherefore” (2.2.62)—and if audiences and readers could break free 
from the high-romantic reputation of the scene, they might start asking it 
for her.1 But the seemingly exhaustive commentary on Shakespeare’s Romeo 
and Juliet has contrived to ignore a cluster of allusions linking the hero to 
the most notorious rapists of classical culture: Tereus, Hades, Tarquin, and 
Paris. Though Romeo’s covert activities beneath Juliet’s window may not 
seem especially sinister on their own, there is something lurking out there 
with him: a cumulative culture of sexual extortion from which Juliet will 
have to extricate her love story. The persistent silent erasure of these threats, 
great and small, by editors and critics typifies the reduction of the play’s 
exploration of the spectrum of sexual aggression into an absolute binary of 
rape and consent—a binary that may serve the ethical demands of our cul-
ture, but hardly matches the complicated experience of adolescent courtship 
to which the play speaks so engagingly. 
       Romeo’s own explanation for his whereabouts hardly exonerates him of 
peeping: he found the place “By love, that first did prompt me to inquire; / He 

Renaissance Quarterly, Volume 58, Number 1 (Spring 2005): pp. 127–156. Copyright © 2005 
Northwestern University Press. 

                                                   91

101
92                           Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes” (2.2.80–81). Certainly the lewd sexual 
banter Mercutio persistently applies to the situation invites us to suppose that 
Romeo is seeking out his beloved’s “straight leg, and quivering thigh, / And 
the demesnes that there adjacent lie” (2.1.19–20) by all available means and 
to the fullest extent possible. If, as Romeo complains, Rosaline was unwilling 
to “bide th’ encounter of assailing eyes” (1.1.213), perhaps he will have better 
luck this time. 
       After   a series of gently  parried thrusts toward  Juliet’s body, and af-

“ ter learning that the feud  will   inhibit  conventional  courtship, Romeo— 
 bewitched by the charm of looks” (2.Chorus.6)—lurks “bescreen’d in night” 
(2.2.52) while the Capulet  household readies for bed. For forty-nine lines 
after Juliet appears in her window (doing what?), he says nothing, only stares 
in secrecy. Twice at least, the text suggests, Romeo prolongs his advantage 
by overcoming an urge to reveal his presence—“I will answer it. / I am too 
bold” (13–14) and “shall I speak at this?” (37)—and instead remains in hid-
ing as Juliet exposes more and more (of her feelings, at least). Romeo assures 
himself “’Tis not to me she speaks” (14), and thus, by the peculiar logic of this 
etiquette, he need not reply but can remain concealed to listen further. 
       To  accuse Romeo of voyeurism here may seem mean-spirited, both 
toward the character and toward the play, but to exonerate him seems pre-
mature (or retroactive), and deprives us of yet another level on which the play 
traces the growth from immature to mature eroticism. Nor is there anything 
inherently ahistorical about the accusation. Despite what may have been a 
lesser standard of bodily privacy across many sections of Renaissance society, 
the possibility of voyeurism is verified by the persistence of scopophilic lyrics 
and sexual jokes. Many comedies in this period tease their spectators with an 
imminent exposure of women’s genitalia—all the more provocatively because 
those spectators knew, on another level, that such exposure was impossible, 
since the women were played by boys. This dropping of the suspenders of 
disbelief is the underlying trick of  Jonson’s Epicoene and the ironic point of 
the interrupted puppet-show in his Bartholomew Fair. The works of Shake-
speare and his contemporaries also frequently allude to the myth of Actaeon: 
a hunter who gazes on the virgin  moon-goddess Diana as she bathes un-
clothed, and who is then  destroyed when she turns him into  a stag to be 
pursued by his hounds.2 That Romeo here vows by the moonlight—which 
in Arthur  Brooke’s The Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Juliet (1562) is what 
exposes him to Juliet’s view—may be romantic, but it is also plausibly an evo-
cation of Actaeon’s story: especially since the wary virgin, Juliet, warns him 
that he may be hunted down and torn apart by a pack if he is noticed there 
(2.2.64–70).3 
       Hapless Actaeon’s glimpse of Diana was, by most accounts, initially ac-
cidental; yet Romeo’s immediate precursor is more aggressive and willful. In 

102
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape  93

Brooke, Romeus casts “his greedy eyes” toward Juliet’s window, and “In often 
passing so, his busy eyes he threw, / That every pane and tooting hole the wily 
lover knew.”4 In Shakespeare, Romeo’s metaphors beneath Juliet’s balcony 
imply similar motives. Gazing up at the “fair sun” Juliet, he immediately urges 
her to throw off her servitude to the virginal moon, and does so in terms that 
suggest he has a specific interim request of her: “Her vestal livery is but sick 
and green, / And none but fools do wear it; cast it off ” (2.2.8–9). It is worth 
noting here that—though it may strike modern readers as a remarkable dis-
placement—English law as well as classical mythography judged men’s eyes 
primarily responsible for sexual crimes. Edward Coke notes that “of old time 
rape was felony, for which the offender was to suffer death, but before this act 
the offense was made lesser, and the punishment changed, viz. from death, to 
the losse of the members whereby he offended, viz. his eyes, propter aspectum 
decoris, quibus virginem concupivit.” 5 
       Romeo’s plea “that I were a glove upon that hand, / That I might touch 
that cheek” (2.2.24–25) is generally taken as a  lovely moment of  exalted 
courtship, if charmingly puerile. By wishing to be the glove, rather than the 
invasive hand or phallic finger, Romeo stays a decorous arm’s length from, 
say, the sardonic De Flores of The Changeling—whose possession of Bea-
trice’s glove leads him to consider “thrust[ing] my  fingers into her  sockets 
here”6—or from Shakespeare’s own Tarquin, who seizes Lucrece’s glove on 
his way to her bedchamber (316–322). But Romeo’s imaginings here are akin 
to Parthenophil’s increasingly vulgar wishes in Barnabe Barnes’s Sonnet 63 
(1593). After a quatrain citing Jove’s predatory metamorphoses—becoming 
a bull to abduct Europa, an imposter-Diana to rape Callisto, and a shower of 
gold in Danae’s lap—Parthenophil indulges in some fantasies of his own: 

       Would  I were chang’d but to my mistresse’ gloves, 
       That  those white lovely fingers I might hide;
       That  I might  kisse those hands, which mine hart loves, 
       Or  else that cheane of pearle, her necke’s vaine pride,
       Made proude with her necke’s vaines; that I might folde
       About  that lovely necke, and her pappes tickle,
       Or  her to compasse like a belt of golde;
       Or  that sweet wine, which downe her throate doth trickle,
       To kisse her lippes, and lye next at her hart,
       Runne through her vaynes, and passe by pleasure’s part.7

It is  a slippery slope to the clowns who wish  they were fleas so that they 
might inhabit  the  undergarments of the kitchen-maid  Nan  Spit in  Mar-
lowe’s Doctor Faustus, or to the various smirking personae of Cavalier verse 
who lasciviously imagine  transforming  themselves into  their  mistresses’ 

103
94                           Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

garters: it is only  too easy to degenerate from Lovelace’s “Elinda’s Glove” 
to his later “Her Muff.”   Romeo mopes into the vicinity of those degrading 
analogues in the balcony scene, and at 3.3.30–41, where he details the small 
creatures, including flies, who will have access to Juliet’s body (from which 
he himself is banished).8 And what might we deduce is on Romeo’s mind in 
his very next speech, when he compares himself to a mortal whose “white-
upturned wond’ring  eyes . . .  gaze on” an angel who  “bestrides the  lazy 
puffing clouds, / And  sails upon the bosom of the air” (2.2.26–32)? Gazing 

“ up at a bestriding form tends to offer an intimate view; two scenes later, the 
 smock” of  the Nurse—who  is herself enduring the  “ropery” (2.4.146) of 
Mercutio’s verbal assault—is called “a sail” (102–103).9 These offenses may 
seem mild, but they raise the question whether Romeo intends to earn or 
steal the erotic commodities he seeks from Juliet. In  the  anonymous The 
Puritan (1607)—which  at  moments looks like  a comic  parody of  Romeo 
and Juliet—Moll comes out on her balcony “lacing of her clothes,” and her 
prospective boyfriend Penny-Dub offers to climb up to her bedchamber. She 
refuses: “Ile keepe you downe, for you Knights are very dangerous if once 
you get above.”10 
       Juliet promptly  (and quite  sensibly) devalues Romeo’s oaths, since “at 
lovers’ perjuries, / They say, Jove laughs” (2.2.92–93); Ovid’s Ars Amatoria had 
advised young men not to “be timid in your promises; by promises girls are 
caught; call as witnesses to your promise what gods you please.”11 She there-
fore reacts to his subsequent “O, wilt  thou  leave me so unsatisfied?” with 
a testing, and arguably testy, question of her own: “What satisfaction canst 

“ thou have tonight?” (125–126). Even what she has already given has cost her 
 a maiden blush” (86). There is fear, not just girlish generosity, in her wish that 
she could retract her gift of love so she could “give it thee again” (131)—an 
anticipation of the problem of virginity as an erotic commodity. 
       Juliet’s best alternative to that impossible retraction is to render Romeo’s 
own commitment unretractable, and—as throughout this scene, where she 
wonders about high walls and worries about armed guards while he blithely, 
even blitheringly, claims love can somehow easily transcend such things—she 
answers his vague Petrarchan formulas with practical details: 

       Three words, dear Romeo, and then goodnight indeed.
       If  that thy bent of love be honorable,
       Thy  purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
       By one that I’ll  procure to come to thee,
       Where and what time thou wilt  perform the rite. (2.2.142–146) 

The  possibility  that  this  Romeo is  merely an  amorous predator clearly 
crosses the minds of both Juliet, who  worries that  he “meanest not well” 

104
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape  95

(2.2.150), and her protective  Nurse, who warns  him  not to  “lead  her in 

( a fool’s paradise” (2.4.165–166) before inviting him back for  the  second 
 2.4.165–166). 2.3 begins with the  Friar,  too, fearing  that Romeo is  just 
another young man inclined to seduce and abandon, one who believes he is 
fulfilling   body and soul when he is merely reciting a clichéd and destruc-
tive script; 2.4 begins with Mercutio offering a similar—though more blunt 
and more approving—analysis, and ends with the Nurse worrying the same 
point. Indeed,  by delaying her  report about  Romeo, the Nurse  seems to 
demonstrate the coquettish techniques that Juliet has dangerously failed to 
practice: increasing male desire by deferring it, mixing a feigned dislike with 
liking,  and indignation with  playfulness, and demanding protracted bodily 
ministrations (in the Nurse’s case, a backrub) before surrendering the main 
thing desired (in the Nurse’s case, news of Romeo’s reply). 
       Having  long (and unhappily) refrained from imposing phallic violence 
on Rosaline—and, more recently, on Juliet—Romeo stabs their cousin Tybalt: 
Shakespeare’s contemporaries did not need Freud to help them recognize 
stabbing as a version of rape.12 As in Othello, the swordfight on the street 
looks very much like a displacement of the confrontation in the newlyweds’ 
bedroom.13 In the confrontation with Tybalt, Romeo is at first too affection-
ate to draw his sword, then—feeling his manhood compromised by his gentle 

“ passivity—returns with reckless violence against Juliet’s flesh and blood: 
 Now I  have stain’d the childhood of our joy / With blood remov’d but little 
from her own” (3.3.95–96). Instead of a confirmatory showing of the wed-
ding night  sheets, spotted with the blood  of  maidenhead, the wedding is 
compromised by the public display of a bloody shroud.14 
       News that “Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood” makes Juliet cry out, “O 
serpent heart, hid with a flow’ring face” (3.2.71, 73); this, however, is only an 
amplification of something she might have cried had Tybalt and Romeo nev-
er fought, something she must already (however unwillingly) have suspected. 
The fears that Juliet intermittently voices in the play can be readily located in 
Brooke, where they are, if anything, even more conspicuous.15 Brooke’s Juliet 
suspects the phallic serpent of treachery: 

       What  if his suttel brayne to fayne have taught his tong,
       And  so the snake that lurkes in grasse thy tender hart hath stong?
       What  if with  friendly speache the traytor lye in wayte,
       As oft  the poysond hooke is hid, wrapt in the pleasant bayte?16 

These images of satanic ambush and deceit may seem overly dire, but they 
clearly establish the idea that Juliet’s specific fear (in Brooke) is of a sexual 
fall—a fear she then elaborates by noting those Renaissance poster-boys of 
misogyny, Aeneas and Theseus: 

105
96                           Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

       Oft  under cloke of truth, hath falshod served her lust
       And  toorned theyr honor into shame, that did so slightly trust.
       What,  was not Dido so, a crouned Queene, defamd?
       And   eke for  such  an heinous  cryme, have  men not  Theseus 
       blamd?17

Later, after Romeus kills Tibalt, Juliet returns to her former suspicions that 
Romeus gave her merely “paynted promises” and “with veile of  love” hid 
from her his “hatreds face.”18 Disingenuous seduction may lack the triumph 
of men’s violence over women’s will  by  which  modern culture  identifies 

( rape—especially since it involves at least an illusory consent—but for women 
 and indeed for the  law) it  has long represented one more middle case in 
the spectrum between rape and love-making.  Limiting   one’s interpretive 
aperture to the rosier hues of that spectrum does no service to the love story, 
because it does no justice to the dangers Juliet must accept in pursuing it. 
       The fear of callous abandonment, or even murder, is predictably subtler in 
Shakespeare’s version, yet it persists.19 Though 2.2 of Romeo and Juliet is gener-
ally known as “the balcony scene,” there are actually two balcony scenes: one on 
the way up, one on the way down. We arrive at 2.5, the second balcony scene, 
with Romeo in obvious jeopardy, but Juliet hardly less so. As the wedding night 
ends, her first words are the archetypal complaint of the soon-to-be-abandoned 
woman: “Wilt thou  be gone?” (3.5.1). It is easy enough for us to know she is 
not Dido, but how can she be confident that her dreamboat will not float off 
in the manner of Aeneas, or something even worse? (Similar fears occur to Jes-
[sica about her feud-crossed elopement with Lorenzo in The Merchant of Venice 
 5.1.1–20].) A potentially disturbing feature of the first balcony scene is that 
Romeo enters; a potentially disturbing feature of the second is that he exits. 
       In  2.2 Juliet questioned in the practical voice: who are you, how did you 
get in, how are you going to get out, what are we going to do about all this, 
how will I  get a message to you, where, and at what time? Romeo is full of 
empty clichés about the moon and her eyes and eternity. In 3.5, however, the 
roles appear to have been reversed, perhaps because the balance of power has 
shifted in the aftermath of sexual consummation. Romeo is the one focused 
on business, while Juliet is lost in romantic dream and hyperbole, wanting to 
pretend it to be midnight. What satisfaction can she have this morning from 
his rather formal, proverbial, and seemingly complacent responses to her pas-
sionate entreaties and her worries about her continuing attractiveness to him? 
The contrast of tones is striking: 

JULIET:  Art  thou gone so, love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
       I  must hear from thee every day in the hour,

106
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape  97

       For in  a minute there are many days.
       O,  by this count I shall be much in years
       Ere I  again behold my Romeo!
ROMEO:  [From below] Farewell!
            I  will  omit no opportunity
            That  may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
JULIET:  O, think’st  thou we shall ever meet again?
ROMEO:  I doubt it  not, and all these woes shall serve
       For sweet discourses in our times to come.  (3.5.43–53) 

His speeches here are as formally clothed as hers are emotionally naked. 
       The fictive spaces and physical arrangements of the two balcony scenes 
thus take us from the verticality of  courtship idolatry (balcony as pedestal) 
to the horizontal parity of the consummated marriage (balcony as bed). The 
scenes also take us from the extremely tenuous privacy of the lovers’ isolation 
from their families to a relationship that is no longer entirely secret, and that 
is pressured in increasingly drastic ways by the circumstances of the public 
world of  the play. Indeed, the much  shorter farewell episode records that 
pressure by its very brevity: fifty-nine lines to Romeo’s exit, in contrast to the 
189 lines of 2.2, which keeps not ending. The Nurse provides another index 
of this change. In the first she is a minor and invisible irritant—perhaps even 
helpful, giving occasion to renew the farewells and resistance to sharpen the 
desires. Her entrance into the second scene, however, brings with it not just 
her usual bawdy-comic energies, but also a sharp note of danger. Her warn-
ings to “be wary, look about” (3.5.40) remind us that, from the perspective of 
the feud, the lovers’ clandestine marriage remains illicit and vulnerable. At 
that instant Romeo descends from Juliet, and they are never again together 
in life. 
       The differences between the scenes are also recorded metrically, if we 
take John Barton’s point that “a shared verse line says, ‘pick up the cue.’  ” 20 In 
the first balcony scene, Romeo and Juliet divide pentameter lines eight times. 
Their mutual interruptions and self-interruptions—signaled by syntax as well 
as meter—and the uneven lengths of their speeches create a feverish pace on 
stage and establish an intimate connection between them. In contrast, the 
second balcony scene opens with Romeo and Juliet taking turns in an orderly 
fashion in speeches of similar lengths. The awkward, ecstatic energies of 2.2 
are depleted. There are no incomplete sentences and only one shared line, and 
a rather chilly one it  is. No wonder the word “fickle”  now winds itself into 
three consecutive lines of Juliet’s speech (3.5.60–62), though she diligently 
applies the word to Fortune rather than to Romeo. 

107
98                           Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

       Is the fuel gauge of this passion, though surely not on “Empty,” already 
showing that first little flicker of the low-tank  warning light? Our traditions 
and desires in reading the story resist such suspicions, but Juliet cannot know 
the traditions, or trust the desires. Accordingly, the language of this abbrevi-
ated aubade is strongly charged with regret on her part, and with exhaustion 
on his. Telling Romeo that the nightingale’s song “pierc’d the fearful hollow 
of thine ear” (3.5.3) articulates Juliet’s own pierced virginity. (That the “hol-
low” is “fearful” also suggests, retroactively, Juliet’s ambivalence toward her 
own sexual desires.) His refusal, also expressed with anatomical precision, 
is based on the fact that “night’s candles are burnt out” (9). How can she be 
sure that Romeo has not taken his pleasure knowing full well that he would 
be gone the next day anyway, and (because of the illicit nature of their clan-
destine marriage) that no one could profitably say anything to call  him to 
account? The laws were generally quite clear that a woman who failed to cry 
out immediately for help—therefore, any woman who (like Juliet) was within 
earshot of potential rescuers—forfeited any right to  claim  rape thereafter. 
Brooke’s Juliet voices that very fear: 

       And  thou, the instrument of Fortunes cruell will,
       Without  whose ayde she can no way, her tyrans lust fulfill,
       Art  not  a whit ashamed, (as farre as I can see)
       To cast me of, when thou hast culd the better part of me.21 

Although  it  is Fortune to  whom she attributes this  Tarquinian  cluster of 
cruelty, will,  tyranny, and lust,  these seem barely disguised accusations of 
Romeus himself as one who shamelessly “culls” her and then casts her aside. 
Indeed, when Romeus explains why Juliet must  not depart  with  him—a 
decision modern students of Shakespeare’s play certainly recognize as ques-
tionable—his arguments seem far-fetched, and include the expectation that 
he will be executed “as a ravishor” of “a careless childe.”22 
       A  further fear awaits both Juliets, one that would make such a betrayal at 
once more explicable and more terrible, and would align the betrayal with the 
modern perception that rape is a crime based more in power than in sexuality. 
Might  not this offer Romeus/Romeo the last laugh on a family he hates—a 
dirty joke  for his  Montague pals and a dark stain on  the Capilet/Capulet 
honor? 23 In Shakespeare’s “The Rape of Lucrece” the tyrant Tarquin actually 
wishes that he had some familial grudge against Lucrece’s husband, because it 
might give him an “excuse” for committing the rape, “As in revenge or quittal 
of such strife” (232–236); indeed, as in many other Renaissance rape-stories, 
the main motive for the victim’s suicide is to protect her family from shame 
by proving that the intercourse was in no way consensual.24 In Brooke, Juliet 
explicitly worries that Romeus will  seduce and then defame her as part of 

108
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape  99

the feud, giving the Capulets an affront which they will  find  unanswerable 
in kind: 

       Perhaps, the great revenge he cannot woorke by strength,
       By suttel sleight (my honor staynde) he hopes to worke at length.
       So shall I seeke to finde my fathers foe, his game,
       So I  defylde, Report shall take her trompe of blacke defame,
       Whence she with puffed cheeke shall blowe a blast so shrill
       Of  my disprayse, that with the noyse Verona shall she fill.
            Then  I, a laughing stocke through all the towne becomme, 
            Shall  hide  my selfe, but  not  my shame, within   an hollowe 
       toombe.25 

Shakespeare’s Juliet will find herself in a tomb soon enough, in an effort to 
conceal the truth about that amorous night. 
       Shakespeare connects the polemically cautionary world of Brooke to 
his own play early in the very first scene, when the Capulet servant Samp-
son—whose behavior is about to be mimicked by his betters—boasts that “I 
will show myself a tyrant: when I have fought with  the [Montague] men, I 
will be civil  with the [Montague]  maids; I  will cut  off their heads . . . their 
maidenheads” (1.1.21–126). The implication that this interfamilial war might 
spill over into sexual exploitation prepares us to recognize the further threat 
of deception and humiliation that Juliet must evaluate. 
       The unpleasant possibilities we have raised would bring into focus an-
other pair of ominous classical allusions. Juliet opens the second balcony scene 
with rape-references so indirect that they seem to have escaped commentary 
by the play’s countless editors and critics, yet distinct enough to conspire with 
Ovidian anxieties elsewhere in the play.26 As usual, it is difficult and perhaps 
unnecessary to judge whether these allusions should be taken as conscious on 
Juliet’s part, as reflecting a subconscious anxiety she dares not quite confront, or 
as imposed by Shakespeare—exterior to the character—to warn the audience. 
It is worth  noticing, though, that she is evidently inventing the nightingale, 
whether as an oblique expression of her own fears or as a provocation to 
Romeo. Although neither the nightingale nor the  pomegranate tree appear 
in Shakespeare’s known sources, they appear together in her aubade, carrying 
considerable emblematic weight: 

       Wilt   thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
       It  was the nightingale, and not the lark,
       That  pierc’d the fearful hollow of thine ear;
       Nightly  she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
       Believe me, love, it was the nightingale. (3.5.1–5)

109
100                         Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

This draws on  a sequence of bird references in their previous encounters: 
2.2.22, 158–183; 2.5.7, 74. John Lyly’s Campaspe, a prominent play in the 
previous decade, signals the ominous associations of this avian pairing: 

       What  Bird so sings and yet does wail?
            O  ’tis the Ravish’d Nightingale.
            Jug, jug, jug, jug, Tereu, she cries,
            And  still  her woes at midnight rise.
       Brave prick-song! Who is’t now we hear?
            None but the lark so shrill  and clear.
       Now  at heaven’s gate she claps her wings,
            The  morn not waking till  she sings. 27

In Ovid’s  Metamorphoses, the nightingale was once Philomel, transformed 
after Tereus raped her and  cut out  her tongue  to prevent her  testimony 
against him. The  bird’s melodious song is therefore both lamentation and 
compensation for Philomel’s brutal silencing. The nightingale  was said to 

“ press a thorn against its breast to give its tune a lyric accusing the rapist: 
 Tereu, Tereu!”
       Wherefore  might  Romeo be Tereu? Suppose what Juliet thinks  she 
hears is neither nightingale nor lark, but the proverbial fat lady singing, mark-
ing an ending, an undignified if  operatic defeat. Tybalt would clearly want 
to offer his young cousin a warning resembling what Marcus tells Lavinia, 
after the fact, in Shakespeare’s preceding tragedy, Titus Andronicus: “A craftier 
Tereus, cousin, hast thou met.”28 These stories usually seem to be on Shake-
speare’s mind when a woman is about to be violated, even when the violation 
is by trickery rather than force. In Cymbeline, Jachimo compares himself to 
Tarquin as he sneaks into Imogen’s bedchamber to steal the sight of  her 
uncovered breast, and notes that “She hath been reading late / The Tale of 
Tereus.”29 In A Midsummer Night’s Dream, the chorus of the singularly inef-
fective fairy spell — designed to protect the sleeping Titania, who is about to 
be deluded into the embrace of the transformed Bottom — begins each time 
by calling on “Philomele” to provide the song.30 Tereus’s wedding with Proc-
ne was illuminated by “Furies snatching Tapers up that on some Herce did 
stande” (matching Shakespeare’s insistent blending of wedding and funeral); 
Tereus tried “to corrupt hir  servants” and “to bribe hir  Nurce to prosecute 
his vice”; finally, he hid his captivity of Philomel by telling everyone she had 
died.31 All these features draw that then-famous rape story into the mental 
field of spectators at the now-famous love story of Romeo and Juliet. 
       Our  familiarity  with  Romeo and Juliet leads us to assume we are in the 
scenario of Keats’s “The Eve of St. Agnes,” where young Madeline wants 
young Porphyro to  sneak into her  chamber and seduce her, and he fully 

110
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 101

intends to marry her. But we cannot—or at  least Juliet cannot—absolutely 
put aside an alternative scenario, which Shakespeare recorded as “The Rape of 
Lucrece.” There Shakespeare repeatedly cites the figure of Philomel because 
Lucrece wants to replace the birdsong of day with the voice of the nightin-
gale, to prevent day from shedding light on her shame in the aftermath of 
the rape (1079–1148). Juliet does not say that she has been abducted and 
raped by Romeo, but she does imply that, were Romeo to leave now, instantly, 
then what has happened between them will have been little better than that. 
Indeed, to have married the young noblewoman Juliet without her parents’ 
consent places Romeo in a murky legal category associated with rape; by 
making Juliet even younger than she is in Brooke, Shakespeare assures the 
criminality  of the match  by Elizabethan standards, which also means that 
neither the Nurse nor the Friar—both of whom will lack the courage to de-
fend the couple in other moments of crisis—could support Juliet’s claim of 
marriage without risking jail.32 The crime that first populated Rome (the rape 
of the Sabine women) and that later made Rome a republic (the rape of Lu-
crece that provoked the overthrow of the Tarquins) hovers uneasily around a 
Veronese youth with the exotic name of Romeo.33 

                                          2.  The Underworld 
Juliet’s imaginary nightingale sings from a pomegranate tree, surely direct-
ing our attention to a second classical story: Hades’ rape of Persephone, who 
was obliged to remain as his bride part of every year because she ate some 
seeds from an Underworld pomegranate tree. That story will  resurface in 
Shakespeare’s late plays: in both The Winter’s Tale (4.4.116–118) and The 
Tempest (4.1.89) it serves to warn that even such princes among men as 
Florizel and Ferdinand might become rapists, rather than fiancés, to young 
women who love too much and trust too far. 
       In  the  first  balcony scene, Juliet is already rehearsing for the role of 
Persephone: “Sweet, good night! / This bud of love, by summer’s ripening 
breath, / May prove a beauteous flow’r when next we meet” (2.2.120–122). 
What presses the seasonal floral reference toward the classical myth is Juliet’s 
suggestion, at the end of the Capulet ball, that the only alternative to mar-
rying Romeo would be a marriage to death and the Underworld: “If  he be 
married, / My grave is like to be my wedding-bed” (1.5.134–135). That sug-
gestion resounds through the remainder of the play: “earth hath swallowed all 
my hopes but she,” says her father (1.2.14); “I would the fool were married to 
her grave!” adds her mother (3.5.140). 
       In  his associations with sycamore trees and westward darkness, and in 
his vampire-like aversion to the light, Romeo from the beginning seems to 
belong in the classical Underworld to which “dusky Dis” dragged Persephone 
(1.1.121–122, 138; The Tempest, 4.1.89) because he knew that her mother, 

111
102                         Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

Demeter, would never otherwise permit the marriage. Juliet’s famous soliloquy 
anticipating the wedding night—“Gallop  apace, you fiery-footed steeds, to 
Phoebus’ lodging” (3.2.1–2)—reinforces that impression. “Phoebus’ lodging” 
was generally understood to be the Underworld (where the solar chariot had 
overnight parking privileges); so while Juliet’s principal reference is unquestion-
ably to that chariot, her desire for these steeds to hurry her to her deflowering 
hints that she may instead be boarding the chariot of Hades which rushed 
Persephone across the burning Phlegethon. As later with her eroticized ver-
sion of Lucrece’s suicide, Juliet here seems to be recapturing a rape story as, 
instead, her own passionate will. In contrast to the suave irony with which 
Thomas Carew’s “The Rapture” transforms the classic rape victims into lasciv-
ious partners, Juliet’s summoning of these steeds suggests her determination 
to make something positive out  of the  worst-case scenarios that implicit-
ly haunt her throughout  this courtship. “Give  me my Romeo, and when I 
shall die . . .” (3.2.21), says Juliet, anticipating his arrival upon their wedding 
night and yet intimating a link, beyond the erotic pun, between Romeo and 
her own mortality. When Juliet is told, shortly thereafter, that he has indeed 
proven to be an agent of death, she says that news belongs “in dismal hell” 
(44), and then goes on to depict him as a “serpent heart” among the flowers, 
a “dragon” in a “fair . . . cave” (73–74), a potential Hades-figure destroying an 
Edenic garden scene, invading innocent flesh, dragging nature down into the 
dark Underworld: “O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell / When thou didst 
bower the spirit of a fiend / In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?” (80–82). 
So it is appropriate for her to conclude, despairingly, “death, not Romeo, take 
my maidenhead” (137): symbolically, there is not much difference.34 
       These Hades-Persephone references culminate when Lord   Capulet 
finds Juliet, seemingly dead, on her wedding morning: 

       Death  lies on her like an untimely frost
       Upon the sweetest flower of all the field. . . .
       O  son, the night before thy wedding-day
       Hath  Death lain with  thy wife. There she lies, 
       Flower as she was, deflowered by him,
       Death  is my son-in-law, Death is my heir,
       My  daughter he hath wedded. (4.5.28–29, 35–39) 

       Even  Romeo, who earlier dreamed of being “an emperor” among the 
dead (5.1.9), echoes the allusion when he finds her beautiful body down in 
the Capulet tomb: 

            Shall I  believe
       That  unsubstantial Death is amorous,

112
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 103

       And  that the lean abhorred monster keeps
       Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
       For fear of that, I  still will  stay with thee,
       And  never from this palace of dim night
       Depart  again. (5.3.102–108) 

Death, too, begins to look like a rapist, stealing women’s bodies in the dark-
ness, erasing their will. Henry Chettle’s Englands Mourning Garment (1603) 
urges the shepherd to “remember our Elizabeth, / And sing her Rape, done 
by that Tarquin, Death.”35 
       In  the Persephone story, the messenger god Hermes arrives moments 
too late to redeem her completely from the “palace of dim night,” the royal 
family of the dead: she has already tasted its fruit.36 But the seasonal solution 
to Persephone’s death is implicit in the play’s metaphysical and metatheatri-
cal suggestion that she may spring back up to life in some next cycle, as Juliet 
does in the tomb—and also in every new production of the play—precisely 
because of her willingness to die for love. In other  words, the associations 
with the rape of Persephone amplify the noble, as well as ignoble, possibili-
ties of a play where undying love and violent death are constantly striving to 
surround and suppress each other, where comedy and tragedy compete for 
the authority to frame this as a story either of renewal or of termination. The 
notion of Romeo as Hades may suggest that he is a ravisher who destroys his 
bride, but it also contributes to a pattern of redemptive hints that he carries 
her—or rather, they carry each other—to another world on the far side of a 
mortal barrier. This would be not rape, but rapture. 
       In  this world, however—according to Shakespearean drama—Italy’s the 
right place for rape.37 Even prospective husbands are sexual suspects. In Titus 
Andronicus, when Lavinia’s gallant young fiancé Bassianus carries her away 
to prevent a dynastic marriage that her father was imposing, he is accused of 
rape, and has to answer, “Rape call you it, my lord, to seize my own, / My true 
betrothed love, and now my wife?” (1.1.405–406). 
       The discrepancy between Lord Capulet’s protestations to Paris and his 
practices with Juliet in 3.5.141–195 remind us only too clearly of the element 
of coercion behind even seemingly consensual matches for aristocratic young 
women in this period. Like several other prominent dynastic-marriage dramas 
in the period, from The Spanish Tragedy to Webster’s great tragedies, Romeo 
and Juliet effectively unravels the myth of “consent” (e.g. 1.2.17), hinting that 
marriage often entailed a degree of rape.38 In Robert Mead’s The Combat of 
Love and Friendship (1654) Melesippus tells his daughter that, though he 
hopes she will accept his choice, it is “No Marriage; but a well nam’d Rape, 
where friends / Force Love upon their Children; where the Virgin / Is not so 
truly given, as betraid” (1.4.9–11). Sebastian in Cyril Tourneur’s The Atheist’s 

113
104                         Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

Tragedie (1611) makes the point even more directly: “Why what is’t but  a 
rape to force a wench / To marry, since it forces her to lie with him she would 
not?” (1.4.129–131). George Rivers’s The Heroinæ (1639) observes that “Dido 
refused marriage, shee could not love. Marriage to her had been a rape, an-
other had enjoy’d her against her will: if a rape must bee avoyded with the 
losse of life; through how many death[s] must she flie a loathed bed, where 
every night she shall be ravished?” (87–88). This enforcement makes an even 
more disturbing spectacle when the enforcer is the father, often insisting (as 
in classical comedy) that the daughter marry someone close to himself in age; 
it is hard to say whether the tradition of powerful theatrical fathers—such as 
Theophilus Cibber in the 1740s and Charles Kemble in the 1830s—playing 
Romeos to their daughters’ Juliets was an effort to exploit or to preclude the 
transgressive aspects of the play’s sexuality. 
       Conceivably playing in Shakespeare’s mind, as he imagined Lord Cap-
ulet’s anguish about Juliet, was Agamemnon’s anguish about his daughter in 
Euripides’ Iphigenia at Aulis: “And for this  poor maid—why  maid? Death, 
methinks, will soon make her his bride—how I  pity her! . . . Alas! to  what 
utter ruin  Paris, the son of Priam, the cause of these troubles, has brought 
me. . . .”39 In the history of sexuality as told to the Renaissance, a princely 
figure named Paris carried a lovely young woman off from her legitimate hus-
band. In both stories, Paris thus occupies a middle category: not exactly a rap-
ist in the obvious criminal sense—though he was often listed alongside more 
egregious rapists—but someone using force to take a woman to his bed, with 
destructive consequences, as “The Rape of Lucrece” reminds us at some length 
“(1471–1568).40 Lucrece reproves him for committing this violation out of 
 lust” (1473), while  Troilus and Cressida calls him “wanton Paris” sleeping 
with “the ravish’d Helen” (Prologue, 9–10). For both Helen and Juliet, though 
in inverse ways, the figure of Paris ultimately  asks at what cost a woman 
can—by giving or withholding consent—defy the marriage demanded by the 
social order. 
       Brooke’s poem emphasizes this onomastic connection. When Romeus 
attends the Capilets’ Christmas party (not to  be confused with the Capu-
lets’ midsummer feast), he glimpses Juliet: “At length he saw a mayd, right 
fayre of perfect shape / Which Theseus, or Paris would have chosen to their 
rape.”41 This couplet seems especially abrupt if we come to it, as most all of us 
do, from Shakespeare’s tragedy. What Theseus (whose notorious perfidy with 
women is recalled in A Midsummer Night’s Dream) or Paris (tampered jurist, 
wife-abductor, war-inciter) should be doing here, at the precise moment of 
origin of this  exemplary relationship of true love, is therefore disturbing to 
contemplate.42 Several versions of Helen’s story report that, as a very young 
woman, she was carried off—long before Paris did the same—by Theseus, 
who later went on a disastrous expedition to kidnap Persephone (with whom 

114
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 105

we have seen Shakespeare persistently associating Juliet) from Hades. George 
Turberville’s 1567 version of The Heroycall Epistles of . . . Publius Ovidius Naso 
offers this tale in a way that again blurs the boundary between rape and Paris’s 
abduction of Helen: 

       Cause Theseus wrongde me once,
       well  worthie am I deemde
       To be a Ruffians rape againe,
       and so to be esteemde?
       The  guilt was mine if I
       allured were to yll:
       But  so I rapted were by force,
       what coulde I doe but nill? (Epistle 16, 41–48) 

Drawing  on all  these strands of  cultural  legacy, Shakespeare evokes the 
tangle of consent and coercion for a young woman in his society. 
       Brooke does not exactly say that Romeus is like-mindedly a rapist, but 
the energies released by the classical references—and by the rhyme that joins 
the perfection of  Juliet’s body with the  idea of its  violation—suggest that 
characteristics within Romeus are here being emblematically expressed. Later 
in Brooke’s poem, when Juliet has feigned agreement with the plan to marry 
Paris, she tells her mother that she will seek to please her new husband by 
wearing “the bravest garments and the richest jewels” she owns—”for if I did 
excel the famous Grecian rape, / Yet might attire helpe to amende my bewty 
and my shape”—echoing the rhyme that  communicated Romeus’s love at 
first sight, and expressing Juliet’s awareness of her bigamous predicament.43 
       Now, clearly, evidence against Brooke’s Romeus should not be admis-
sible in a trial of Shakespeare’s Romeo any more than Trojan Paris’s actions 
should be held against County Paris. Nonetheless, an array of details from 
the Tragicall Historye confirms the cultural reasons why Juliet, in both poem 
and play, might well be wary of any wooer, let alone a gatecrashing Montague. 
Interpreting Shakespeare through his sources is, of course, a tricky task. Find-
ing the secret meaning of a Shakespeare play precisely in what he chooses to 
mute or omit seems perverse, though there could be an ironic production of 
meaning in the audience if the source’s story was well-known—as Brooke’s 
poem was—and value for the self-delighting playwright’s mind even if the 
source were obscure.44 Some subliminal residue seems plausible in this heavily 
allusive artistic culture. Since this residue needs to suggest nothing more than 
a repressed impulse in Romeo or repressed fear in Juliet, a thin association 
may nonetheless be sufficient and noteworthy. Indeed, scholarly exposition of 
the plays may resemble (though many suspect quite the opposite) the nor-
mal workings of the human mind, which navigates through the internal and 

115
106                         Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

external complexities of human experience by a layering of allusions, stories 
of varying degrees of proximity and vividness, most of them indirectly inher-
ited, that tell us what to want and what to fear. 
       In  thus  naming and situating Paris, Brooke and Shakespeare pass on 
their sources’ conflation of the notorious classical seizer of women with the 
general figure of the unwanted husband.45 Furthermore, in the fights over 
Juliet Shakespeare conflates the two main ways Renaissance women were de-
nied subjectivity and choice in the process of courtship: by their treatment as 
objects of exchange and competition among men, and by deprivation of their 
consent in their choice of spouses—though this was a problem for men also—
and in their sexual relations with those spouses.46 According to Ovid, Venus 
actively promotes Persephone’s rape as advantageous to Venus’s dynastic am-
bitions, ordering Cupid to aim at Dis: “And wherefore then should only Hell 
still unsubdued stand? / Thy mothers Empire and thine own why doste thou 
not advaunce?”47 As if to focus on the element of rape in the enforcement of 
marriage, Juliet’s solution to the proposed match with Paris echoes the pleas 
of most women faced with rape in classical and Renaissance literature: 

       O,  bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
       From off  the battlements of any tower . . .
       Or  hide me nightly in a charnel house,
       O’ercover’d quite with dead men’s rattling bones . . .
       Or  bid me go into a new-made grave,
       And  hide me with a dead man in his shroud. (4.1.77–78, 81–85) 

The Friar does then give her death and entombment as the only way to stave 
off Paris’s amorous intentions.48 From there on her body becomes an object 
of adoration while she remains absolutely passive, though actually inwardly 
alive; the necrophiliac appeal of  the ending is  another force drawing the 
audience into fantasies of something like rape. 
       Even Paris’s attack on Romeo at the Capulet tomb seems founded on 
the suspicion that Romeo intends to perform some necrophiliac violence (or 
vandalism) against Juliet’s helpless corpse, “to do some villainous shame / 
To the dead bodies” (5.3.52–53). It is not an unfounded fear, given the com-
monplace association between womb and tomb, and especially if (as happens 
so often in Shakespearean tragedy) he partly overhears the worst of Romeo’s 
words. Romeo tells Balthasar that he has come “partly to behold my lady’s 
face, / But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger / A precious ring—a 
ring that I  must use / In  dear employment” (29–32). The final scene of The 
Merchant of Venice shows that Shakespeare assumed an association between 
wedding rings and female genitalia; in Titus Andronicus he has Martius say, of 
the corpse of a man whose wife has just been raped, “Upon his bloody finger 

116
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 107

he doth wear /  A  precious ring that  lightens all  this hole” (2.3.226–227); 
and Middleton’s The Changeling confirms what sexual import English Re-
naissance playwrights could convey by amputated ring-bearing fingers.49 The 
same rather banal synecdoche appears here in the gendered pair of suicides, 
one by cup and one by  sword; the Capulets have every reason to believe, 
at 5.3.205, that Romeo has stabbed her, and even our knowledge that this 
was suicide rather than murder makes her destiny, her choice, only further 
resemble that of Lucrece. The way Romeo continues from there is, however, 
even more ominously vague: 

       But  if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
       In  what I farther shall intend to do, 
       By heaven I will tear thee joint from joint,
       And  strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
       The  time and my intents are savage-wild. (33–37)

So dark a secret must surely suggest, to a half-informed observer such as 
Paris—as to Fernando at a notably parallel moment in  John Ford’s Love’s 
sacrifice—the prospect of Juliet’s posthumous rape by the prying Romeo.50 

                                            3.  The Academy 
Rape is thus the threat encompassing and permeating the physical actions, 
the psychological tensions, and  the classical allusions of  what  is widely 
deemed the ultimate love story. Even among the male characters, the rela-
tionships (particularly in performance) seem to take on strong overtones of 
sexual aggression, ranging from sexual teasing and playful wrestling to the 
deadly serious phallic violence of swordfights.51 The problem is that rape is 
hardly less complex or historically determined than sexuality in general: it 
appears in various guises and various degrees. Modern commentators have 
been understandably reluctant to  address this problem,  but  Renaissance 
playwrights—negotiating a  culture  whose notions of  rape were multiple 
and changing—repeatedly juxtapose the different forms  and severities of 
compulsion (including  prostitution)   by  which  women  were deprived of 
sexual choice. Compare, for example, the way Romeo and Juliet places socio-
economically compelled marriage alongside dishonest seduction and more 
direct physical violence, with the various impingements on women’s erotic 
will in  Middleton’s Women Beware Women and The Changeling, Jonson’s Vol-
’pone, The Alchemist, and Bartholomew Fair, Marston’s Sophonisba, and Ford’s 
Tis Pity She’s a Whore. 
       Shakespeare’s Paris—named after a famous quasi-rapist, and  him-
self unwittingly  attempting a quasi-rape—may either point  up or channel 
off Romeo’s associations with rape. Similarly, one could either  defend or 

117
108                         Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

prosecute Romeo by acknowledging that standard courtship, manipulative 
seduction, underage marriage, offensive peeping, actionable stalking, and 
criminal rape are parts of a continuum of  male sexual aggression, however 
sharply and rightly we might  want to moralize and legislate the difference 
between the extremes of that continuum. It is not just by chance, then, that 
Friar Lawrence’s observation about how the same herbs can be medicine 
or poison, depending on the dosage, leads directly into his efforts to evalu-
ate Romeo’s sudden passion for Juliet. There is certainly a crucial difference 
between “grace” and “rude will”—indeed, they are “opposed”—but both “en-
camp them still /  In man” (2.3.27–28). Later in the  scene, “grace” becomes 
Romeo’s euphemism for erotic requital (2.3.86),  whereas “rude will” sug-
gests, in Elizabethan slang, male sexual aggression. Romeo is undeniably 
announcing a deep—and, more importantly, a requited—love when he tells 
the Friar: 

            but come what sorrow can,
       It  cannot countervail the exchange of joy
       That  one short minute gives me in her sight.
       Do  thou but close our hands with holy words,
       Then  love-devouring death do what he dare,
       It  is enough I may but call her mine. (2.6.3–8) 

Yet, apart from line 6, Tarquin or Tereus could sincerely have said the same. 
       Of  course we are not claiming  that  Romeo—even to the extent one 
deems him a complete and independent being rather than a mere dramatic 
character—is guilty of rape in the modern sense; only that Juliet might have 
reason to doubt his innocence and to question the honor of his intentions. 
Our  understanding of this latent  guilt  is much like  Edward Snow’s more 

“ psychoanalytic perception that a fantasy of violence against the female body 
 does not so much enter Romeo’s psyche as take its place in the haunted 
male background which the gentleness of his own love stands out against but 
never entirely exorcises.”52 Robert Appelbaum observes that, “because of our 
current difficulty in  discussing the structure of masculinity without putting 
it on trial  and pronouncing it guilty, our experience of tragic subjectivity in 
Shakespeare has been unable to find a suitable critical vocabulary.”53 The same 
problem hinders the search for a vocabulary of erotic aggression. 
       Much  more could be said here to historicize the  crime of rape.54 But 
what about historicizing our discussion of it? What here could not have been 
written thirty   years ago, when feminist scholars began excavating analyses 
of sexist violations from  the depths of Shakespearean drama?55 Perhaps it 
is enough to say that, for whatever reason, this particular piece of that story 
went (to the best of our knowledge) unwritten; perhaps the implication that 

118
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 109

specters of rape hover over even the most youthful and charming courtships 
would have been so unpopular and deterministic as to undermine the social 
advocacy such criticism often sought to perform. But even the most transcen-
dently romantic reading of the play’s bloody ending may remind us that, in 
the biological scheme, the necessary prelude to new birth may look disturb-
ingly like an act of physical violence. 
       Why, then, has Romeo remained a fugitive from gender justice so long, 
while Leontes, Hamlet, and several Claudios sat glumly in the dock hearing 
their indictments? The easy answer is that Romeo is innocent. The hard truth, 
though—however prettily the nightingale may sing it—is that  the world is 
not, and that the lover and the rapist are often separated by exactly the kind 
of reassuring conventional boundary that  Shakespearean drama is always 
threatening to blur. The plays are part of an unacknowledged legislation of the 
world that takes account even of those crimes that occur only in the desiring 
and fearful minds of potential perpetrators and victims, where they appear as 
uneasy dreams of a personal future that can be articulated only in terms of the 
collective past, in the great stories of love and death. 
       The feud has trapped these lovers outside the social rules, leaving them 
dangerously, exhilaratingly free to invent their own; but they are not outside 
the culture, whose landmarks they still must use to orient themselves. There is 
nothing so unusual about the ways Juliet (at 1.5.110) and Friar Lawrence (at 
2.3.88) try to tease Romeo out of his bookish wooings; anti-Petrarchan satire 
was commonplace. What makes this instance unusually compelling is the 
persistent question of whether the lovers, having broken free from the scripts 
of facile erotic complaint, can also pull free from more grandly tragic prec-
edents. Like Lorenzo and Jessica at the beginning of act 5 of The Merchant of 
Venice, they can test their own situation only by brushing against tragic erotic 
touchstones such as Troilus and Cressida, Pyramus and Thisbe, and Dido and 
Aeneas—maybe even against Tarquin and Lucrece, Hades and Persephone, 
and Paris and Helen. 
       Our  main  critical  point, then,  is how often  Romeo and Juliet alludes 
to rape, in all the  different ways Renaissance law and literature defined it; 
our metacritical point is how diligently commentary on the play has looked 
away from those allusions. Not much in a major Shakespeare play has gone 
unexamined by simple carelessness; so this gap in the discussion of a play in 
which a young woman is about to be forcibly carried off to a bigamous bed 
by a man named Paris, and is then repeatedly associated with Persephone 
carried off to bed against her will  by Hades, seems worth remarking, even 
if Juliet did  not  also echo Philomel and Lucrece. A small but  representa-
tive instance of the averted (or distracted) gaze of criticism is the fact that 
neither the Variorum nor any standard modern edition of Romeo and Juliet 
remarks upon the special Ovidian charge Shakespeare achieves by locating 

119
110                         Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

an (imaginary) nightingale on a pomegranate tree in the Capulet orchard on 
the morning after the couple’s sexual initiation. Commentary instead looks 
to ornithology, folklore, travelers’ tales, or “poetic tradition” for an explana-
tion of this line.56 
       A  meta-metacritical incident may help to explain this blind  spot. This 
article was previously submitted to another distinguished journal, where a 
reader’s report scoffed at our reference to “phallic violence”—“I think they 
mean ‘sex,’ ” the report suggested, though our point was that Romeo’s deeds 
with Juliet blur into his deeds with Tybalt—while deciding that, by the “sexual 
aggression” involved in mating, we must really have meant “rape.” This de-
termination to push all male sexual activity into one of two perfectly distinct 
categories (for which we must simply have forgotten the words) is exactly the 
kind of erotic essentialism we were trying to resist and what we were arguing 
that the play resists. The other reader more openly objected to our failure to 
assert clear divisions among things called lovers, husbands, and assailants: “It 
really is important to recognize the distinction between seduction, courtship, 
and rape, even, or especially, when arguing that the culture works to elide 
them.”  Yet we had been quite explicitly arguing exactly the opposite: that the 
culture, as is morally imperative, works to distinguish these things, which in 
experience can often be murky and shifting—especially for a young person 
alone in the middle of them, deciding from moment to moment what to at-
tempt and what to permit, how to send and how to read the often intricate 
and paradoxical signals of the human mating dance. The play persistently re-
minds its audience that people have to try to navigate by clear cultural mark-
ers—Is my suitor Petrarch or Tereus?—even while knowing that neither is 
likely to  tell the whole  story reliably. As a Caroline handbook for English 
gentlewomen would warn, “Your True-love may prove a Jason or a Theseus, and 
leave you in the bryers for all your confidence.”57 Whether Romeo is to be 
regarded as lover, husband, or rapist, depends on what each onstage observer 
knows and does not know at that particular moment; exactly the same can be 
said of his rival Paris (and of the Trojan Paris as well). 
       Since we had tried not to write  obscurely, we conclude that something 
else was obscuring our argument. This something sounded like indignation, 
not only at our failure to emphasize the romantic aspect of the play, which we 
thought hardly needed reiterating, but also at our rejection of the fantasy that 
there is no third alternative between the benign melting-together of angelic 
lovers—as in Donne’s “Air and Angels” and Milton’s Paradise Lost, devoid of 
any element of physical aggression or potential exploitation—and sub-bestial 
attacks, such as those upon Lucrece and Lavinia.58 
       Acknowledging  middle  cases which can  be viably erotic  while  still 
entailing physical aggression is risky, because many rapists have doubtless 
exploited it to escape their due punishment; we trust it is clear that we are 

120
               “Wherefore Art Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 111

neither denying nor justifying the fact of rape. But do these risks really jus-
tify steadfastly or reflexively averting our eyes from the deep questions this 
play so forcefully raises? As with so many of Shakespeare’s other politically 
disquieting moments (on race and class as well as gender), perhaps it is time 
we moved from silent censorship to an open confrontation with the issues—
issues which the plays doubtless raise for their audiences whether or not 
scholars like or admit it.  In  the Renaissance the availability of a romantic 
reading did not automatically  exclude the threat of what they  called rape; 
indeed, rape often led to marriage with a complacency now hard to fathom.59 
Moreover, it is hard to imagine a more gorgeous evocation of poetically con-
ventional male erotic desire than the one Shakespeare provides for Tarquin 
as he prepares to rape Lucrece. 
       Renaissance literature reflected a legal principle that women slip into 
complicity with  a rapist if they experience any pleasure, or conceive a child, 
during the act.60 Though we now find that idea quite objectionable, scientifi-
cally as well as politically, it does mirror an important feminist argument that 
consensual sex can become rape during the act; and this kind of psychological 
vacillation of consent does not disappear from erotic experience just because 
we fear the consequences of acknowledging it. In an influential Renaissance 
analysis, Coluccio Salutati explained Lucrece’s suicide as partly the result of 
her anguished recognition that she found some pleasure, however unwilling, 
in the rape, and therefore partook of its guilt. The pain of the sword serves to 
renounce and thus cancel any pleasure from the phallus:

       Because rape takes place physically and psychologically inside, it 
       is,  as Mieke  Bal explains, “by  definition  imagined; it  can  only 
       exist as experience and as memory, as image translated into signs, 
       never  adequately objectifiable. .  .  .  Because of this   difficulty 
       in  representing rape, its depiction  is often  displaced; it  is then 
       depicted as self-murder, as in  Lucretia’s case where self-murder 
       stands for rape, the suicide becoming its metaphor.” The figuring 
       of rape through the image of suicide is perhaps most conspicuous in 
       the  paintings of the period. Although  paintings depict separately 
       the rape and the suicide, the weapon with which Tarquin initially 
       threatens Lucrece always prefigures the weapon she will later use 
       in  her suicide, just as the weapon of suicide represents or stands in 
       for  Tarquin’s weapon and the phallus it symbolizes.61

Juliet finally  takes command of this  destructive legacy, as she earlier had 
appropriated Tarquin’s and Hades’ impatience for the  dark  night  and its 
sexual energies (3.2.1–31). She reclaims pleasure by consensual death with 
Romeo; she brings together the phallus and the sword, welcoming Romeo’s 

121
112                         Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

“happy dagger” into   what she calls—as Shakespeare’s Lucrece did in  a 
parallel moment, 1723–1724—the “sheath” (5.3.169–170) of her body. By 
attending to rather than  trying  to  deny the complex weave of sex, power, 
and violence in the play, we can see Juliet forcibly rearranging it to meet the 
needs of the moment: her moment, but one shared—if only in metaphorical 
or milder form—by many other women, then and now. 
       The same blurring of the boundaries distinguishing  courtship, seduc-
tion, rape, and marriage  is a prominent  feature of  A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream, the play Shakespeare was most likely writing simultaneously with 
Romeo and Juliet. When Shakespeare revises “The Knight’s Tale” into The 
Two Noble Kinsmen, Chaucer’s clear “distinction between licit  sexual in-
tercourse and rape is virtually  obliterated.”62 Do we know  that Caliban’s 
actions toward Miranda  were any more violent than,  say, Silvius’s toward 
Phoebe? The difference  between the  heroically/romantically   persistent 
wooer and the criminally  persistent one is rightly   in the  eyes of the per-
son being courted, but may be hard—or, in cases of racism, too easy—for 
others to see. Did  Katharine in  Henry V, or  even Isabella in Measure for 
“Measure, have much more choice about her sex partner than Lucrece in 
 The Rape of Lucrece” or Lavinia in  Titus Andronicus? Does it resolve the 
problem to assume that the wives will find  more pleasure in and after the 
consummation than  the rape victims,  or does that  push us back toward 
the repugnant old suggestion that  a woman should seek pleasure even in 
imposed sex acts, and the hardly-less-repugnant old legality that acquitted 
men of rape if  the  woman ended up  taking any pleasure or bearing  any 
progeny from those acts? 
       If  we do not acknowledge the ancient specter of rape haunting this story, 
we cannot recognize what Juliet does to exorcise it. The insistence that male 
erotic desire is always categorically either perfectly inoffensive or a criminal 
offense finally serves some urgent feminist causes no better than the division 
of women into madonnas and whores. Nor does it serve very well the cause 
of this great Shakespearean tragedy, which depends for both its pity and its 
fear on the recognition that Juliet must find her own way into the uncertain 
meaning of her own uncertain story, and pay for her final triumph over such 
categories with her life.
       The Nurse’s recollection of her late husband’s bawdy joke and the tod-
dler Juliet’s strangely equanimous reply suggests that Juliet’s destiny rests in 
her character, and that it is not a purely tragic destiny:

        “Yea,” quoth he, “dost thou fall upon thy face?
       Thou  wilt  fall backward when thou hast more wit,
       Wilt   thou not, Jule?” and by my holidam,
       The  pretty wretch left crying and said, “Ay.” (1.3.41–44) 

122
                 “Wherefore Art  Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 113

This  may  seem mere  comic  patter,  but  Shakespeare has  the  Nurse  tell  the 

“ whole story three more times within    ten lines,  ending  each time  with  Juliet’s 
 Ay,” like  James Joyce allowing Molly   Bloom  finally   to lift  sexual consent free 
from  ambivalence:  “yes I  said yes I  will  Yes.”  In  a play laden  with  foreshad-
owings,  and  fates adumbrated  since  birth,   Juliet  here shows  her precocious 
and prodigious  determination    to see what others  might  perceive as a danger-
ous fall  as instead a positive  choice;  to take  what  the conventional   elders see 
as mere injury   and  affirm   it  as her  erotic  will;   “to  lose  a winning   match,   / 
Play’d  for a  pair  of stainless  maidenhoods”   (3.2.12–13);  to  look  ahead, stop 
her tears,  and  say unflinchingly     to  the  “perilous   knock”   (1.3.54)  of  sexual 
experience, through   pain  and blood,   “Ay.”

                                                         Notes

         1. All  references to Shakespeare’s works follow The Riverside Shakespeare, ed. 
G. Blakemore Evans et al., 2nd ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,  1997).
         2. References to Actaeon are especially noticeable in Shakespeare’s Elizabethan 
comedies. As Barkan has shown, Shakespeare draws on the Actaeon myth clearly in 
The Merry Wives of Windsor and extensively in A Midsummer Night’s Dream. Twelfth 
Night 1.1.18–22 conspicuously alludes to Actaeon’s transformation (without naming 
him directly); Watson argues for the importance of the myth in As You Like It.
         3.  See Brooke, 468–469. (All   subsequent references to Brooke will  be by 
line number; references to Bullough’s editorial  material will   be by page number.) 
Thinking   of himself  as the even more tongue-tied  Actaeon would  allow Romeo 
partly to excuse his obvious prying into Capulet affairs. Because Actaeon’s glimpse 
of Diana was inadvertent—he was out hunting and, as Juliet might say, stumbled on 
(Diana’s counsels—his punishment was the result not of  “desart / But cruell Fortune” 
 Golding,  3.164–165; all subsequent references to Golding’s translation will be to 
book and line number). Such a formulation later proves attractive to Romeo after he 
kills Tybalt and exoneratingly proclaims himself “Fortune’s fool” (3.1.136).
         4. Brooke, 440–441. Bullough, 297, glosses “tooting” as “peeping.”
         5. Coke, chap. 13: “with  which he desired the virgin,  because of the sight of 
her beauty.” Subsequent references add castration to the blinding, but that the initial 
reference is to blinding seems remarkable.
         6. Middleton  and Rowley, 1.1.230.
         7. M.  Evans, 164, ll. 5–14.
         8.  When Romeo  specifically imagines “carrion  flies”  that “may seize /  On 
the white  wonder of  dear Juliet’s hand, /  And  steal immortal   blessing from her 
lips” (3.3.35–37)  it  is difficult    to  avoid seeing her as a  flyblown  corpse that  is 
simultaneously the object of courtship. We have moved, here, disturbingly graveward 
from the frolickings of Lesbia’s sparrow and its avian descendants in amorous verse, 
where the wooer envies the bird’s access to the beloved. The fuller implications of 
Romeo’s necrophiliac nuance, and of the idea of a Juliet who is always in some sense 
dead, will be developed later in this article.
         9.  Franco Zeffirelli’s   film   of 1968  develops this confrontation  in  strongly 
physical ways when an  initially   flirtatious   Nurse  undergoes what is  arguably a 
stylized, slapstick stripping   and gang-rape by Mercutio   and other  not-so-gentle 

123
114                            Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

men of Verona. Mercutio lifts her skirt  from behind,  feigns the escape of malodors 
therefrom, yanks her huge veil about during the “hoar”/“hare”/“whore” flyting, then 
removes it altogether and wears it as a kind of false bosom, as though having exposed 
and captured her body. The Nurse is left with  a kiss, knocked down  on the stairs 
in the public square. The scene as a whole visually and performatively foreshadows 
the duel  between Mercutio  and  Tybalt,  fought in  the  same place and similarly 
surrounded by onlookers, thus linking sex, violence, and intermittent comedy—riot 
and laugh-riot—much as the play’s opening dialogue does.
         10.  Sig. H2r, lines 31–32.
         11.  Bate, 179. Certainly  the well-read  Juliet of  Brooke’s Tragically Historye 
worries that  the  literary  odds almost assure her wooer’s treachery: “A  thousand 
stories more, to teache me to beware, / In Boccace, and in Ovids bookes too playnely 
written are” (393–394).
         12.  See Gorges, bk. 4, 359–360: “If they by fight  away would scape, / With 
your sharp blades their bosomes rape.”
         13.  A  more extended version of this parallel occurs in Twelfth Night, where 
two unmanly  suitors flee a duel in  3.4 before blood can be shed—suggesting the 
fears preventing Orsino and Olivia from achieving marital consummations—only to 
yield to true bloodshed and marital consummation in 4.1 when the truly masculine 
Sebastian replaces the faux-masculine Cesario in brawl, and then in bed.

( 14.        Capulet’s horrified  “O  heavens! O wife, look how our  daughter bleeds!” 
 5.3.202)  similarly   registers the   confusing  and  tragic   simultaneity  of   Juliet’s 
maturation, consummation, and demise. While much of the language of the play’s 
end shows the characters trying to  lodge Romeo and Juliet in  the  sterilized past 
of narrative, Capulet’s present tense directs public attention to the ongoing, active 
messiness of the catastrophe.
         15.  Such fears echo onward into John Quarles’s “Tarquin Banished: or, the 
Reward of Lust”   (1655), where Lucretia finds  that  her “table  fed a Serpent, not 
a Dove”  (2)—terms Juliet  applies to Romeo  at 3.2.73–76—and where Tarquin’s 
response to banishment markedly resembles that of Romeo  in 3.3.  It  is  decided 
that Tarquin’s  sentence “should not be speedy death, but  . .  .  a sad and lasting 
banishment”: “This news arriving unto Tarquins ears / He soon begins to argue with 

/ his fears: / Must I be sent, cryes he, into a place / Of no society, and there imbrace 
  Perpetual woe? Oh! how could Hell  contrive / So great a plague to keep me still 
alive? / What  shall  I  doe in this  extreme abysse / Of  woe and torments? Death 
had been a blisse / Beyond expression . . .” (7). Romeo also claims to prefer death 
as “merciful” compared to banishment, which he likens to “purgatory, torture,  hell 
itself ” (3.3.12–18; cf. 47–48). This cluster of associations, established by verbal and 
circumstantial allusion,  may suggest that, by  the seventeenth century, aspects of 
Romeo and Tarquin have become conflated within the cultural memory.
         16.  Brooke, 385–388.
         17. Ibid.,  389–392.
         18.  Ibid., 1114, 1126.
         19.  For fears of murder in Brooke, see ibid., 1123–1128.
         20.  Barton, 32.
         21.  Brooke, 1591–1594.
         22.  Ibid.,  1651–1654.
         23.  Burks,  769, quotes Aristotle’s Master-Piece—a notably “popular text on 
reproductive biology” translated into English just  before Shakespeare wrote Romeo 

124
                 “Wherefore Art  Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 115

and Juliet—which warns parents to raise their girls carefully, “most of all the Virgins, 
when they grow up to be marriageable, for if through the unnatural severity of rigid 
Parents they be crossed and frustrated in their love, many of  them, out  of a mad 
humour, if temptation  lies in their  way, throw themselves into the unchaste Arms 
of a subtle,  charming Tempter, being  through  the softness of good  Nature, and 
strong Desire, to pursue their Appetites, easily induced to believe Men’s Flatteries, 
and feigned Vows of promised Marriage, to cover the shame; and then too late the 
Parents find the effects of their  rash Severity, which brought a lasting  stain upon 
their Family.”  Notice again how poorly  the boundaries separating ordinary sexual 
desire and destructive sexual violation appear to have been marked.
         24.  Stimpson,  58,  cites  “political   or  familial   revenge” as  “the  common 
justification  for  rape”; see “Shakespeare and the Soil  of  Rape.” In   Renaissance 
culture generally, the woman’s willing  death is the surest, perhaps the only, proof 
that she really had been raped; see Williams, 105–108.
         25.  Brooke, 395–402.
         26.  Williams,   93,  begins  her  impressive study  by observing  that  “Brief 
allusions to rape occur throughout Shakespeare’s work, combining maximum effect 
with  minimum  critical  perturbation.” She does not, however, mention Romeo and 
Juliet, despite her recognition that “For Renaissance readers, the best-thumbed guide 
to ancient riots, incests, and rapes is Ovid’s Metamorphoses” (97).
         27.  Lyly, 5.1.35–42.
         28.  Titus Andronicus, 2.4.41.
         29.  Cymbeline, 2.2.12, 44–45
         30.  A Midsummer Night’s Dream, 2.2.13, 24
         31.  Golding, 6:550; 589–590.
         32.  Dalton,  248, explains that “The  taking  away of a maide under sixteene 
yeares of age, without   the  consent of her  parents or  governors, of  contracting 
marriage with her, or deflowering  her, is no felony, but yet shall be punished with 
long imprisonment,   without  baile,  or  with   grievous fine.”   Coke concludes his 
chapter on rape by noting that marrying a woman below the age of consent without 
her parents’ endorsement falls under the  same category. John Donne discovered 
unhappily that  society would  not  forbear punishing  a  seducer of an aristocratic 
young woman just because he was willing to marry her. In his complaint that “Young 
beauties force [y]our love, and that’s a rape”—“The Autumnal,”  3—Donne  shows 
another way the category is elastic in this period.
         33. Livy,   bk. 1,  chap. 9, describes the mass rape of the  Sabine women as 
Romulus’s ultimately  successful tactic  to  populate  Rome;  Detmer-Goebel,  76, 
asserts that “rape is the centerpiece of Shakespeare’s fictional history of Rome.”
         34.  Farrell,  144,  observes that “Romeo  imagines Juliet  sexually  enslaved 
in the  ‘palace’ of a ‘monster’ who is also a warrior-king. This  fantasy projects the 
long-denied dark side of the patriarchal forms  in which  the lovers have construed 
each other. Romeo dissociates from himself as Death the part of  him  that would 
be made an emperor by Juliet’s kiss. In this final  moment of tenderness he rejects 
the devouring triumphalism   latent in  all  patriarchy. .  . .  Otherwise, loving  such 
an emperor-Romeo, Juliet would be submitting  to rape like  the women Sampson 
fancies ‘ever thrust to the wall.’”
         35. Chettle, 35–36.

125
116                            Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

         36.  Porter, 80–81,  104, 127, 192,  explores the pertinence  of Mercury   (or 
Hermes) to Mercutio in, among other ways, his role as conductor of souls to Hades’ 
Underworld.
         37. Stimpson, 57.
         38.  It   is  important  to  remember,  however, that  modern  concerns about 
marriage as a way of achieving rape were less noticeable, four hundred years earlier, 
than concern about rape as a way of achieving marriage, since a woman known to 
have been violated became hard to wed to anyone but her violator, and widows could 
sometimes be compelled to marry their  attackers—both facts which men  used to 
enforce profitable matches. Coke, chap. 11, reports this misfortune  befalling  two 
widows; cited by Burks, 768, n. 23.
         39. Jones, 110–118, argues that Shakespeare drew on Iphigenia at Aulis in 
writing Julius Caesar; a Latin translation had been published by Erasmus at the start 
of the sixteenth century. There is also reason to believe that Shakespeare knew the 
other Euripides play that Erasmus translated, Hecuba.
         40. For example, see Robert Chester’s “To the kind Reader” in the 1601 Loves 
martyr, which lists  “Hellan’s rape” and “Lucrece rape” in  parallel. The  crimes are 
similarly run together in  Johnson, chap. 15: “What became of Hellens rauishment, 
but the destruction of  renowned Troy? What of  Romane Lucresiaes rape, but the 
bannishment of Tarquin? and what of  Prognies foule deflowrement by  her sisters 
husband, the lustfull King  of Thrace, but the bloudie banquet of his yong Son Itis, 
whose tender bodie they serued to his table baked in a Pie?”
         41. Brooke, 197–198.
         42. For  A Midsummer Night’s Dream, see especially 2.1.74–80; furthermore, 
the entire opening scene of the play emphasizes that Theseus is taking a bride by 
force.
         43. Brooke, 2235, 2237–2238.
         44. See Bullough, 1:275, on Brooke’s wide readership.
         45. Levenson, 7, notes that in Bandello’s version of the tale, “in a rare moment 
of wordplay, Giulietta  describes Count Paris of Lodrone as a thief (‘ladrone’) who 
steals another’s property.”
         46. English  legal history  indicates that rape itself  was evolving in  the later 
sixteenth century from a theft  of male property toward a violation of  female erotic 
will.  Williams,  99–100, reports that “The  late sixteenth century is  a watershed in 
rape law. From Anglo-Saxon times, rape was defined as the abduction of a woman 
against the will  of her male guardian. Consent was often irrelevant; violation  was 
a side-issue: the crime was essentially theft.” Statutes in 1555 and 1597 broke rape 
and abduction into distinct offences; Detmer-Goebel, 75–78, explores the growing 
authority  of women’s testimonies as rape,  and the  victim  of  rape, became thus 
redefined in law. Though  her discussion focuses on Lavinia in Titus Andronicus, it 
also indirectly illuminates the way Juliet’s relatively isolated predicament informs her 
rhetorical choices in articulating both  her desires and her fears. For more on these 
legal changes, see Bashar.
         47. Golding, 5:466–467.
         48. Any  wedding-night  intercourse with Paris would be both  unwilling  and 
extramarital, thus  placing it  firmly  in  the  category of rape, a charge from which 
marriage often gave husbands immunity. However decorously floral Paris’s presence 
in the graveyard may be, it disquietingly displaces his deflowering intentions for the 

126
                 “Wherefore Art  Thou Tereu?” Juliet and the Legacy of Rape 117

wedding-night, when—according to the Nurse’s bawdy speculation—Paris would let 
her “rest but little” (4.5.7), and not in peace.
         49. In  3.4 De  Flores continues his digital  assault on Beatrice by presenting 
her with  Alonzo’s  severed finger, on  which  sparkles the diamond  ring  she had 
been forced to send her unwelcome wooer. A  complex sexual bargaining ensues: 
though De Flores gets the ring  for his murderer’s fee, his symbolic castration of a 
rival—and his demand for Beatrice’s virginity—turns  the  scene into, among other 
things, the parodic wedding of a couple “engag’d so jointly” (89) by guilt, for which 
the unfortunate Alonzo serves as best man.
         50. Romeo here closely resembles the penitent Duke in act 5 of Loves sacrifice, 

“ who returns to the tomb of the beloved he has killed sounding oddly like Romeo: 
 Peace and sweet rest sleep here; let not  the touch  /  Of  this  my impious  hand, 
prophane the shrine /  Of  fairest  purity,  which houers yet  / About  those blessed 
bones inhearst within”—returns to the tomb of the beloved he has killed, only to be 
confronted by Fernando in the role Paris feels he must play. He is then confronted 
by Fernando in the role Paris feels he must play: “Forbeare; what art thou that dost 
rudely presse / Into the confines of forsaken-graues? / Has death no privilege? Com’st 
thou, Caraffa, / To  practise yet a rape upon the dead? Inhumane Tyrant; / Whats’ 
ever thou intend’st, know this place / Is poynted out for my inheritance: / Here lyes 
the monument of all my hopes. / Had  eager Lust intrunk’d  my conquered soule, / 
I had not buried living  ioyes in death: / Goe, Revell in  thy pallace, and be proud / 
To boast thy famous murthers: let thy smooth / Low-fawning parasites renowne thy 
Act: /  Thou com’st not here” (395–407). That Ford seems to allude—extensively, if 
parodically—to Romeo and Juliet in his ’Tis Pity She’s A Whore may lend extra weight 
to these comparisons.
         51. Though it is obviously a further reach, Romeo’s speech to the Apothecary 
is oddly reminiscent of the sexual bullying in Lovelace’s poem “The Fair Beggar”—a 
speech to a starving woman where seduction is again inextricable from extortion. 
Associating the  young men’s fights with   sexual aggression has become standard 
practice in recent productions.
         52. Snow, 187, argues that Romeo’s “metaphors of grief  ” suggest “a fantasy of 
oral retaliation against the withdrawn, depriving maternal breast.”
         53. Appelbaum, 257.
         54.  See,  for  example,  Helms,  especially  77–91;  Ray;  Catty;   Wolfthal; 
Bamford; Belsey; and Saunders.
         55.  Dworkin   represents an  extreme but  noteworthy   instance of  radical-
feminist conflation of eroticism with  rape; a more recent wave of theory—including 
what has been called “lipstick feminism”—objects that Dworkin’s position tends to 
exclude or occlude heterosexual women’s desire in a way that Shakespeare, here and 
in Othello, clearly does not.
         56.  Evans’s and Levenson’s editions briefly  discuss the  possible Philomel 
reference, but only to account for why Juliet’s bird is female when it is, in nature, the 
male who sings. Levenson does note how thickly the play is textured with “allusions 
to unrelated Ovidian  stories” (16), but confines the Persephone legend to Romeo’s 
speech about the unconscious Juliet as Death’s “paramour” (5.3.105).
         57. Brathwait, 350.
         58. For an example of the way this neat dichotomy hides (even from a leading 
Shakespeare scholar) the play’s disturbing suggestion that, as the  violence has a 
sexual component, so the sexuality has a violent one, see Kahn, 173: “Romeo and 

127
118                            Robert N. Watson and Stephen Dickey

Juliet plays out a conflict  between manhood as violence on behalf of  fathers and 
manhood as separation from fathers and sexual union with women.”
         59. See the  instances explored by  Gossett. Coke,  chap. 13,  discusses the 
problems—arising from  the  class system—with  allowing  a man  to  escape rape 
charges by offering to marry his victim.
         60. Foreste in D’Avenant’s The cruell brother (1630) argues that “‘If compulsion 
doth insist, untill  / Enforcement breed delight, we cannot say, / The femall suffers. 
Acceptance at the last, /  Disparageth the not  consenting at the  first:  /  Calls her 
deniall, her unskilfulnesse; / And not a virtuous frost i’th’ blood’” (5.1). For the legal 
version of this argument, see Dalton, 248: “If the woman at the time of the supposed 
rape, doe conceive with child, by the ravishor, this is no rape, for a woman cannot 
conceive with child,  except she do consent.” Burks, 789, n. 42, cites several other 
instances of this belief from the earlier seventeenth century.
         61. Baines, 90, quoting Bal, 81.
         62. Baines, 87; see also her discussion (76) of the way rape and seduction can 
be mistaken for each other by ahistorical readers. Baines cites Lefkowitz, who argues 
that what have been called rapes in Greek myth are often to be understood (within 
the terms of their culture) as abduction or seduction instead. For an opposing view, 
see Curran.

                                                 Works       Cited 

Appelbaum, Robert. “‘Standing to the wall’: The Pressures of Masculinity in Romeo and 
         Juliet.” Shakespeare Quarterly 48 (1997): 251–272. 
Aristotle’s Master-Piece. London, 1595. 
Baines, Barbara. “Effacing Rape in Early Modern Representation.” English Literary History 
         65.1 (1998): 69–98. 
Bal, Mieke. “The Rape of Lucrece and the Story of W.” In Reclamations of Shakespeare, ed. 
         A. J. Hoenselaars, 75–104. Amsterdam, 1994. 
Bamford, Karen. Sexual Violence on the Jacobean Stage. New York, 2000. 
Barkan, Leonard. “Diana and Actaeon: The Myth as Synthesis.” English Literary Renaissance 
         10 (1980): 317–359. 
Barton, John. Playing Shakespeare. London, 1984. 
Bashar, Nazife. “Rape in England between 1550 and 1700.” In The Sexual Dynamics of 
         History: Men’s Power, Women’s Resistance, ed. The London Feminist History Group, 
         28–42. London, 1983. 
Bate, Jonathan. Shakespeare and Ovid. Oxford, 1993. 
Belsey, Catherine. “Tarquin Dispossessed: Expropriation and Consent in The Rape of Lucrece.” 
         Shakespeare Quarterly 52 (2001): 315–335. 
Brathwait, Richard. The English gentleman and the English gentlewoman. 3rd ed. London, 
         1641. 
Brooke, Arthur. The Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Juliet. In Bullough, ed., 1:284–363. 
Bullough, Geoffrey, ed. Narrative and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare. 8 vols. London, 1957. 
Burks, Deborah G. “‘I’ll Want My Will Else’: The Changeling and Women’s Complicity with 
         the Rapists.” English Literary History 62 (1995): 759–790. 
Catty, Jocelyn. Writing Rape, Writing Women in Early Modern England: Unbridled Speech. New 
         York, 1999. 
Chettle, Henry. England’s Mourning Garment. London, 1603. 
Coke, Edward. The Institutes of the Laws of England. London, 1644. 

128
                   “Wherefore    Art   Thou  Tereu?” Juliet  and the  Legacy  of  Rape 119


Curran,  Leo   C.  “Rape  and  Rape  Victims   in  The  Metamorphoses.” Arethusa 11 (1978): 
          213–239. 
Dalton, Michael.  The Countrey Justice. London, 1618. 
D’Avenant, William.   The cruell brother. London, 1630. 
Detmer-Goebel, Emily.  “The  Need for  Lavinia’s Voice: Titus Andronicus and the Telling of 
          Rape.” Shakespeare Studies 29 (2001): 75–92. 
Donne, John. The Major Works. Ed. John Carey. New York and Oxford, 1990. 
Dworkin,  Andrea. Intercourse. New York, 1997. 
Evans, G. B., ed. Romeo and Juliet. 2nd ed. Cambridge, 2003. 
Evans, Maurice, ed. Elizabethan Sonnets. London, 1977. 
Farrell, Kirby.  Play, Death, and Heroism in Shakespeare. Chapel Hill, 1989. 
Ford, John. Loves sacrifice. London, 1633. 
Golding,  Arthur.   Ovid’s  Metamorphoses. 1567. Ed.   John Frederick  Nims.  Philadelphia, 
          2000. 
Gorges, Arthur.  Lucans Pharsalia. London, 1614. 
Gossett, Suzanne. “‘Best Men Are Molded  Out  of Faults’: Marrying  the Rapist in  Jacobean 
          Drama.”  English Literary Renaissance 14 (1984): 305–327. 
Helms, Lorraine.  Seneca by Candlelight and Other Stories of Renaissance Drama. Philadelphia, 
          1997. 
Johnson, Richard. The seven Champions of Christendome. Part 1. London, 1608. 
Jones, Emrys. The Origins of Shakespeare. Oxford, 1977. 
Kahn, Coppélia. “Coming  of Age in  Verona.” In The Woman’s Part (1980), 171–193. 
Lefkowitz,  Mary  R. “Seduction and Rape in Greek Myth.” In Consent and Coercion to Sex and 
          Marriage in Ancient and Medieval Societies, ed. Angeliki E. Laiou, 17–37. Washington, 
          D.C.,  1993. 
Levenson, Jill L., ed. Romeo and Juliet. Oxford, 2000. 
Livy, Titus.  The History of Rome. 
Loves martyr. London, 1601. 
Lyly, John. Campaspe. Ed. G. K. Hunter. Manchester, 1991. 
Mead, Robert. The Combat of Love and Friendship. London, 1654. 
Middleton,  Thomas,  and William   Rowley. The Changeling. Ed. George Walton  Williams. 
          London,  1967. 
Porter, Joseph. Shakespeare’s Mercutio: His History and Drama. Chapel Hill, 1988. 
The Puritan. London, 1607. 
Quarles, John. Tarquin Banished: or, the Reward of Lust. London, 1655. 
Ray, Sid. “‘Rape, I fear, was root of thy annoy’: The Politics of Consent in Titus Andronicus.” 
          Shakespeare Quarterly 49 (1998): 22–39. 
Rivers, George. The Heroinæ. London, 1639. 
Romeo and Juliet. Videocassette. Directed by Franco Zeffirelli. 1968; Paramount: Hollywood, 
          CA,  2003. 
Saunders, Corinne. Rape and Ravishment in the Literature of Medieval England. Rochester, 
          NY,  2001. 
Shakespeare, William.  The Riverside Shakespeare. Ed. G. Blakemore Evans et al. 2nd ed. 
          Boston, 1997. 
Snow, Edward. “Language and Sexual Difference in Romeo and Juliet.” In Shakespeare’s Rough 
          Magic, ed. Peter Erickson and Coppélia Kahn, 168–192. Newark, DE,  1985. 
Stimpson, Catharine.  “Shakespeare and the  Soil  of  Rape.” In   The Woman’s Part (1980), 
          50–64. 
Tourneur, Cyril.  The Atheist’s Tragedie. Ed. Irving Ribner. Cambridge, MA, 1964. 

129
120                                 Robert  N.  Watson  and  Stephen  Dickey


Turberville, George. The Heroycall Epistles of . . . Publius Ovidius Naso. London, 1567. 
Watson, Robert N. “As You Liken It: Simile in the Wilderness.” Shakespeare Survey 56 (2003): 
          79–92. 
Williams,  Carolyn  D. “‘Silence, like  a Lucrece knife.’” Yearbook of English Studies 23 (1993): 
          93–110. 
Wolfthal,  Diane. Images of Rape: The “Heroic” Tradition and its Alternatives. New York, 1999. 
The Woman’s Part: Feminist Criticism of Shakespeare. Ed. Ruth Swift Lenz, Gayle Greene, and 
          Carol  Thomas Neely. Urbana: 1980. 

130
                                JENNIFER       A.   LOW


                     “Bodied    Forth”:    Spectator,    Stage,  
              and   Actor   in   the  Early    Modern     Theater





Picture  the original staging of these two death scenes:
       In Bussy D’Ambois, the title character fights off a host of assassins, then 
turns to combat the man who has hired them. Upon conquering his enemy, 
Bussy grants mercy to him just as a pistol shot from an assassin standing off-
stage wounds him mortally. Amazed that his body is “but penetrable flesh,” 
Bussy swears to die standing, like Emperor Vespasian, and then apostro-
phizes his sword: “Prop me, true sword, as thou hast ever done! / The equal 
thought I bear of life and death / Shall make me faint on no side; I am up / 
Here like a Roman statue! I will stand / Till death hath made me marble. O, 
my fame, / Live in despite of murder” (5.4.78, 93–98).1 In contrast, the hero-
ine of Romeo and Juliet rises from her catafalque only to learn, as the Friar 

/ gestures toward Romeo’s body, that “A greater power than we can contradict 
  Hath thwarted our intents” (5.3.153–154).2 The Friar almost immediately 
leaves Juliet. Seeking a means of suicide, she finds Romeo’s dagger: “Yea, 
noise? Then I’ll be brief. O happy dagger, / This is thy sheath [stabs herself ]; 
there rust, and let me die” (5.3.169–170).
       Bussy’s death is a public one—Monsieur and Guise look on from 
above—and his final speeches demonstrate his concern with his position in 
the social hierarchy rather than with his private life. The action foregrounds 
his wounded but upright body which, because of the crowd of murderers, 


Comparative Drama, Volume 39, Number 1 (Spring 2005): pp. 1–29. Copyright © 2005 
Western Michigan University.

                                                  121

131
122                                         Jennifer A. Low

must necessarily be located at the forefront of the stage; similarly, because of 
the combat with Montsurry, he must be close to or at center stage. Although 
Bussy is surrounded by others, his opponent and the assassins would be sure 
to stand well out of  reach of his sword. Turned to watch him, Montsurry’s 
face would reflect the audience’s own interest in the extent of Bussy’s injury. 
Tamyra and the shade of the friar might clutter up the visual tableau by ap-
proaching Bussy—or strengthen it by allowing Bussy to stand unimpeded 
until his death. Audience involvement would have been affected by two extra-
dramatic factors: intensified, perhaps, by their proximity to the indoor stage 
of St. Paul’s and distanced, perhaps, by the fact that the actors were children: 
the Children of Paul’s.
       Produced by the Lord Chamberlain’s Men almost a decade earlier, Ro-
meo and Juliet was performed on the public stage. The tomb to which the 
stage directions refer several times would, logically, have been represented by 
the tiring-house, receding from the facade at the back of the large platform 
stage.3 Audiences might even have had to squint or lean forward to see Juliet’s 
exact gesture in that shadowy recess. Aside from the prone bodies of Romeo 
inside and Paris just on the threshold, Juliet would have been quite alone as 
she stabbed herself. The visual focus would have emphasized the narrowing 
perspective created by distance and detail: a significant but not broad gesture, 
staged in a visually uncluttered space, far back from the audience. Such stag-
ing would have pulled the audience in, forcing their involvement by making 
them strain to see the action.
       Both  stagings enclose the death scene. Bussy’s is enclosed by the watch-
ing actors who mirror  for the  audience their spectatorial involvement. The 
death scene is also enclosed mimetically (though not visually) by the scene’s 
setting: Tamyra’s closet, the small room where she has already received Bussy 
and the Friar as they rise through a trapdoor. The necessary staging suggests 
Chapman’s enjoyment of visual paradox. Everything about Bussy’s death em-
phasizes its public nature: his concern with fame, the watchers above, the 
presence of the tangentially involved assassins, the hero’s steadfast insistence 
on dying on his feet (to impress whom if not those watching?); yet it occurs 
in a private place, the one in which Tamyra has engaged her lover in intimate 
acts and her husband in intimate conversations.4 By his theatrical mode of dy-
ing, Bussy transforms Tamyra’s private room into his showplace, the site of his 
final enactment of epic fortitude. By reconfiguring its function, Bussy pushes 
the limits of the imagined space outward. Ringed by the other characters, he 
is enclosed by the space, but by his words he broadens it, dissolving Tamyra’s 
bedroom into the larger frame of the playhouse of St. Paul’s. (Smaller than 
that of Blackfriars, the stage of St. Paul’s was perhaps twenty feet wide and 
fairly shallow, since the entire auditorium was less than sixty-six feet long.)5

132
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              123

       In  the death scene, Chapman has his theatrical cake and eats it too: he 
concludes the play in the kind of intimate setting that functioned so effective-
ly on the stage of the private playhouse,6 yet he permits Bussy the rhetorical 
gestures that transform Tamyra’s closet into an orator’s platform. While the 
setting and the staging of the scene isolate the hero, his performance simulta-
neously reminds the watchers of their collectivity and their role—as watchers 
—in apotheosizing him beyond a mere malcontent or bedroom cavalier. His 
expectation that death will “make [him] marble” alludes to the permanence 
of statuary and evokes both the vertical space of the statue and the horizontal 
space of the tomb’s carved effigy.7 Thus, the setting becomes a metatheatrical 
forum for Bussy’s aspirations to epic heroism: the rhetorical equivalent of a 
modern stage blackout with a spotlight on the face of a soliloquizing actor.
       Juliet’s death scene is also enclosed—by the setting of the tomb and its 
stage equivalent, the tiring-house. Shakespeare uses Romeo to emphasize 
the claustrophobic nature of the place in several ways: by having the youth 
pry open the door  with  a mattock and a crowbar (5.3.22 and 48 s.d.); by 
having him allude to Death as a monstrous Cupid who reenacts the myth’s 
bedroom scene with Juliet (or Romeo himself ) as a new Psyche; by vividly 
evoking the tomb through Romeo’s references to “worms that are thy cham-
bermaids” (5.3.109). For a straight Freudian interpreter, this  Liebestod is 
clearly a return to the  womb.8 Romeo returns to his home in  Verona and 
buries himself, his last gesture an orgasmic kiss. Juliet ecstatically stabs her-
self; like Romeo, her last word is die, with its obvious double-entendre, and 
her final gesture transforms her entire body into a sheath (punning on the 
Latin  vagina) for Romeo’s phallic dagger. The site of her budding fertility 
becomes a place of death.
       Both  death scenes complicate the nature of the place in which they oc-
cur, going well beyond the usual complication of a stage set. Bussy’s speech 
dissolves the fictional place in which the hero dies; Juliet’s tomb metonymizes 
her body. Theorist Anne Ubersfeld asserts that

       By virtue  of the multiplicity   of its concrete networks, stage space 
       can simultaneously convey the image of a metaphorical network, a 
       semantic field, and an actantial [activating or energizing] model. . . .  
       Likewise,  once stage space can be simultaneously the figure of 
       a given text,  of a sociocultural or  sociopolitical network, or of  a 
       topography of the mind, we can be sure that there are substitutive 
       crossovers between these different shaping structures.9

As the penetration of Juliet’s body has been thematized by imagery and re-
presented in her manner of death, it is more generally figured in  Romeo’s 
violent entrance into her tomb. Just as he has forced his way into the Capulet 

133
124                                         Jennifer A. Low

home and the Capulet family,  he now  violates another stronghold of the 
dynasty: their  burial   vault. Each  of  these family   structures—including 
Juliet’s body—is figured  in  Romeo’s final,  frantic  violation  of  the inner 
room. Juliet symbolically  repeats the process of violation when  she stabs 
her own  body. The  same symbolic structure appears to operate, though 
more subtly,  throughout  Bussy D’Ambois, only concluding  with   Bussy’s 
death. The  hero  has always entered Tamyra’s room (the  site of  several 
trysts) by rising  up  out of  a trapdoor from  a  secret passageway suggest-
ing (to a classic Freudian theorist, at least) the vagina. While Tamyra has 
blocked her husband throughout the  play in  every way possible, refusing 
to grant him the  information he asks for even when he stabs her and racks 
her, she is open to Bussy, even arranging his first   visit to  her through  a 
transparent stratagem:

       And  he I love will  loathe me when he sees 
       I  fly my sex, my virtue, my renown 
       To run  so madly on a man unknown. 
       See, see, a vault is opening that was never 
       Known  to my lord and husband, nor to any 
       But  him that brings the man I love, and me. (2.2.124–129)

The “vault”  she refers to is literally  the  machinery raising Bussy and the 
Friar from  the cellarage below. But this is where Freud fails us: though it 
is tempting to  see the passage as female genitalia, there is no evidence to 
suggest that Tamyra denies her husband access to her body. The vault, then, 
represents something more sophisticated: an aspect of Tamyra hidden to the 
world, one revealed only to her father confessor. Despite the focus on access 
to Tamyra’s body, the true emphasis is on her subjectivity.10 As in Romeo and 
Juliet, the playwright uses the fictional space as a figure for the heroine; the 
hero’s penetration of that space, however, is a multivalent act.
       The symbolic framework of such stagings, in which the stage space rep-
resents the self of a character in either physical or psychological terms, was 
by no means an innovation. Such a framework is well known  to dramatic 
scholars today and was quite familiar to the early modern theatergoer as well. 
Its precedent exists in the  morality play, which  allegorizes the Christian’s 
struggle against worldliness as a series of external events. In the morality 
play, while each psychological aspect of the protagonist is personified as a 
separate character in a classic psychomachia (a representation of the conflict 
of the soul), the stage serves as a map of the protagonist’s self, often drawing 
on symbolic meanings of the compass points to justify a character’s entrance 
from a specific direction. In such a play, the Christian figure is staged twice: 

134
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              125

once as an actor in the play’s events and once as the performance site upon 
which the struggle between good and evil is enacted. In Catherine Belsey’s 
words, the Christian figure is “the momentary location” of a cosmic struggle.11 
Though the diagram of the Macro manuscript figures the stage of The Castle 
of Perseverance as a circle, that circle, a microcosm of the world, is also a mac-
rocosm of the Christian  himself. Throughout the play, the stage is the site 
for the wanderings of Mankind, who is enticed by various temptations that 
stand upon scaffolds set at the stage’s perimeter. But these temptations, like 
the figure of God, can also approach Mankind on the stage, thus penetrating 
the space representing his self—what is alternately presented as his soul and 
his consciousness.
       At  certain moments, early modern plays also use the stage (or part of 
the stage) to embody the  main character. Belsey has pointed out that, at 
moments of particular tension, early modern playwrights tended to draw on 
the morality tradition,  engendering what she calls a “tension between real-
ism and abstraction” a moment when psychological drama reverts to almost 
archetypal patterns.12 Such a pattern often develops in plays that thematize 
penetration or repeatedly stage penetrative acts. I use the term penetration 
(advisedly. The word penetrate is etymologically related to the phallic penile 
 suggesting a sexual, if not an erotic, component to the act) but also to the 
geographical peninsula, deriving from the Latin penetrare, which could be 
used to mean “to place within,” “to  enter within,”  or “to  pierce.”  These re-

“ lated terms emphasize the spatial, almost geographical aspect of penetration. 
 To penetrate” means “to make or find its (or one’s) way into the interior of, 
or right through  (something): usually implying force or effort”.13 And even 
by Shakespeare’s time, the word had developed its figurative meaning: “to 
pierce the ear, heart, or feelings of; to affect deeply; to ‘touch.’” The Lati-
nate word was a latecomer to English; decried as an inkhorn term, it  was 
defended by Puttenham, who argues, “Also ye finde these words, penetrate, 
penetrable, indignitie, which I cannot see how we may spare them . . . for our 
speach wanteth wordes to such sence so well to be vsed.”14 I want to bring 
the multiple valences of the word to bear on various dramatic and thematic 
instances of penetration in order to suggest the subjectivity inherent in the 
human being’s consciousness of embodiment.
       In  these dramatic instances, the penetration of space serves as a complex 
representation of the act of gaining access to a character’s interior self. The 
physical space that is penetrated may be the personal space of a character, 
the space created by a grouping of actors, the space of the stage as a whole, or 
even the personal space of the audience. The putative self represented by these 
spaces may signify, variously, a purely corporeal body; a body part (such as a 
vagina or a penis); a mind (or subjectivity); or a heart (either the physical or-
gan or the conventional symbol of the desiring self ). The varied meanings of 

135
126                                         Jennifer A. Low

the “self ” suggested in these spatial intrusions indicate the complexity of the 
early modern experience of selfhood. We can see the partial nature of each 
possibility as we move toward developing a view more thoroughly grounded 
in embodiment.15
       In  Belsey’s view, the model of self presented in the morality play pre-
cludes the possibility of a speaking subject, since even the main character 
lacks agency. Belsey not only dismisses the morality play as a possible locus 
of subjectivity but also presents the links between Renaissance drama and the 
morality in a way that undermines longstanding critical arguments that liter-
ary subjectivity was born on the English Renaissance stage. Belsey draws her 
definition of subjectivity from  a liberal humanist model. Based on language 
and the ability  to speak itself, the subject that  she envisions, a “discursive 
hero . . . independent of providence and of language,” is wholly identified by 
intellectual apparatuses; the subject’s corporeal status is entirely ignored.16 
The Cartesian structures that define such a model also limit it, eliding the 
phenomenological habitus, the experience of being in the body. Despite nu-
merous studies of the body, the interiority of physical experience—Gail Kern 
Paster’s “subjective experience of being-in-the-body”—has been neglected in 
favor of an “objective” examination of the appearance of experience.17 This 
lacuna has only recently been addressed by theorists, and their work is only 
beginning to be applied to the drama.
       In  fact, the physical experience of corporeality also generates a type of 
subjectivity, one that is responsive to constant interaction with the physical 
world—with  the environment, as well as with both animate and inanimate 
objects. This aspect of subjectivity is key to my argument, both because it ren-
ders the “penetration” I see visible and because it broadens the significance of 
that penetration, enabling us to recognize simultaneous, multiple meanings 
of “the self.” In his volume Production de l’espace, Marxist theorist Henri Le-
febvre initiated the reintroduction of the physical self into our understanding 
of subjectivity. He argues that Descartes’ theories marked a crucial dissocia-
tion between self and body and led the understanding of the self in the wrong 
direction, instantiating the germs of an eventual crisis: “With the advent of 
Cartesian logic . . . space had entered the realm of the absolute.”18 As Lefebvre 
explains, the idea of space became entirely abstract, as if the subjective could 
be eliminated from our perceptions:


       “ The  scientific   attitude,   understood  as   the   application   of 
       “epistemological” thinking to acquired knowledge, is assumed to be 
         structurally” linked to the spatial sphere. . . . Blithely indifferent to 
       the charge of circular thinking, that discourse sets up an opposition 
       between the status of space and the status of the “subject,” between 
       the thinking  “I” and the object thought about. . . . Epistemological 

136
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              127

       thought  . . . has eliminated the “collective subject,” the people as 
       creator of a particular language, as carrier of specific etymological 
       sequences. . . . It has promoted the impersonal “one” as creator of 
       language in general, as creator of the system. It has failed, however, 
       to  eliminate the need for  a subject of some kind. Hence the re-
       emergence of the abstract subject, the cogito of the philosophers.19

In  other  words,  scientific  thought,  in   its  dependence upon Descartes, 
has permitted  a  longstanding rift   between  our  (i.e., Western  culture’s) 
quantification of space and our (i.e., each individual’s) experience of space. 
Philosophical thought,   too,  by  following   Descartes in  its  examination 

“ of selfhood, has lost a fundamental component of the self, accepting the 
 impersonal ‘one’” as a substitute  for the  social subject and the  concrete 
subject, the individual.  Recent theorists of space as varied as Yi-Fu Tuan 
and Edward T. Hall   have reminded us that space as we know it is shaped 
by the perception  of our  senses: sight, sound, and touch all  play a part. 
Moreover, as each individual shapes his concept of space, his sense of where 
he is affects his sense of self. Although  space is commonly used in  such 
metaphors as “the social hierarchy” and “the great chain of being,” space is 
a literal experience—an experience of tactility. It is dry or wet, crowded or 
empty, expansive or compressed, and so forth. Even this brief list of expe-
riential alternatives indicates the extent of the awareness based on physical 
feeling, an awareness quite separate from one’s command of language or 
will.  Like the literary  scholar Cynthia Marshall,  who sees in early modern 
culture “any number of signs indicat[ing] an experiential slippage from [the 
conscious, self-determining individual],” I posit a sense of self that is not at 
all dependent on reason or will.20 This experience of subjectivity is located in 
the unmediated experience of physicality, specifically of proprioception, the 
interpretation of stimuli concerning one’s sense of position and one’s experi-

“ ence of the movements of one’s limbs and other body parts. As Paster asserts, 
 bodiliness is  the  most rudimentary  form  of  self-presence.”21 Everyone’s 
sense of existence comes first from the physical sense of one’s own body.
       One’s experience of one’s own physical presence is partly determined by 
biological factors. Twentieth-century social scientist Edward T. Hall builds 
on several studies of mammals by such animal  psychologists as Hediger, 
C. R. Carpenter, and A. D. Bain in order to develop his analysis of human be-
ings’ territoriality. He extensively examines how the nerves in different parts 
of the body help us to develop a sense of space through auditory, olfactory, 
and thermal information. As Hollis Huston explains, Hall’s theory “describes 
not a particular code of manners, but an invariant scale of stimulant thresh-
olds, to which individuals and peoples may respond in various ways.”22 The 
scale refers to physiological experiences consistent across cultures and even 

137
128                                         Jennifer A. Low

across mammalian species; however, different creatures or cultures may re-
spond differently to  their stimuli.  Hegemonic institutions  may attempt to 
restructure the way that certain groups respond to specific spatial experiences, 
distinguishing women from  men or aristocrats from the  underclass or the 
middling  sort, thus dividing a culture along lines of  gender or social rank; 
in such a situation, those involved are engaged in structuring the doxa that 
underlie a psychological response to physiological stimuli. Thus, beliefs may 
intersect with action, and even sensation, though what is true for doxa—that, 
as Bourdieu points out, “[t]he principles embodied in this way are placed be-
yond the grasp of consciousness, and hence cannot be touched by voluntary, 
deliberate transformation, cannot even be made explicit”—is even more true 
of the experience of bodiliness.23 Such an attempt at imposing rules upon a 
specific social group is evident in the many early modern conduct books for 
women: the body of the  gentlewoman was no sooner distinguished as her 
own than it became the subject of many social strictures intended to impose 
a habitus that would become internalized. Women were taught to keep their 
eyes downcast; timidity was encouraged and the blush considered a sign of 
reverence and maidenly virtue.24 Women were also taught not to perceive 
the physical proximity of others as an intrusion. Adult women, even those of 
high status, were expected to endure the approach of others, and even to en-
dure disciplinary violence enacted upon their bodies.25 They were discouraged 
from physical resistance to aggressive seduction or even sexual coercion.26
       This  thoroughly Foucauldian discipline almost certainly  achieved the 
goal of imposing a sense of self-abnegation upon the women who manifested 
the demeanor considered appropriate for their sex and status. One aspect of 
physical experience is the sense of owning or possessing the space around 
ourselves, what we colloquially call “personal space.” Edward Hall developed 
the term  proxemics to refer to study of the individual’s structuring  of and 
perception of space. Hall’s research indicates that our sense of the extent of 
the space we possess is structured by such elements as the perception of heat 
as well as by more purely tactile and visual information. Hall theorizes that 
“[u]ntil  recently man’s space requirements were thought of in terms of the 
actual amount of air displaced by his body. The fact that man has around him 
as extensions of his personality the zones described . . . has generally been 
overlooked.”27
       In  ’Tis Pity She’s a Whore, John Ford’s representation of the female habi-
tus, or experience of being in the body, manifests a significant confusion about 
the nature of female selfhood. The play’s male characters so often allude to 
Annabella in stock terms that  they almost render the heroine a mere plot 
device: a receptacle, an object of erotic desire that male characters wish to 
enter. Staging of the erotic object in early modern drama often makes use 
of mimetic  forms such as entrance onto the stage, in fact: physical and/or 

138
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              129

aggressive intrusion may be enacted in such a way as to suggest erotic bodily 
penetration. But entering may also, depending on the setting, represent pen-
etrating a character’s subjectivity—entering into direct communication with 
a character’s mind, heart, or soul. Though Annabella’s body is the focus of 
several characters in Ford’s play, the author himself manifests a concern with 
the relation between Annabella’s body and her “inwardness”; this concern is 
literally staged throughout the play, as textual images force our attention to 
connections between metaphor, staging, and plot.
       Throughout ’Tis  Pity, there are a plethora of metaphors about various 
containers, and many of these figure Annabella as the container.28 But other 
images of containment metaphorize the body more generally to express sub-
jectivity in  ways that were common during the early modern period. After 
the siblings have had sexual intercourse, Annabella tells Giovanni, “Go where 
thou wilt, in  mind  I’ll  keep thee here” (2.1.39).29 The idea that the beloved 
is contained as an image within the mind or the mind’s eye of the lover fre-
quently recurs (and is read today as a sign of subjectivity) in Shakespeare’s and 
Sidney’s sonnet sequences. Later, Ford strikingly echoes Antony’s opening 
lines in Antony and Cleopatra (as well as the lyrics of John Donne, his contem-

/ porary) when Giovanni says, “Let poring book-men dream of other worlds, 
  My  world, and all of happiness, is here” (5.3.13–14). It would be false and 
reductive to suggest that this reference to Annabella is purely sexual.
       Related  imagery appears when  other  characters anxiously examine 
Annabella’s motives. After advising Annabella, the Friar comments, “But soft, 
methinks I see repentance work / New motions in your heart” (3.6.31–32). 
Her heart represents her interior state; his vision, his ability to see beyond 
her physical appearance. This reference to Annabella’s interiority is repeated 
when Soranzo discovers his new wife’s pregnancy. Eventually, dissembling his 
rage, Soranzo distinguishes between himself and her supposed lover: “Well 
might he lust, but never lov’d like me. / He doted on the pictures that hung 
out / Upon thy cheeks . . . Not on the part I lov’d, which was thy heart, / And, 
as I thought, thy virtues” (4.3.125–129). These characters evince a desire for a 
different, nonsexual penetration: discovery of the truth of Annabella’s heart. 
Her consciousness, her subjectivity become as much of a focus of the play as 
her body.
       This concern is dramatized by staging and by verbal references to stage 
action. In a play that begins with a speech about bodily space and continues 
with a complaint about violent intrusions upon one’s space of private prop-
erty, we might expect to see intrusion staged repeatedly. Indeed, one of the 
characters, Annabella’s maidservant, actually states this expectation: “How 
like you this, child? Here’s threat’ning, challenging, / quarreling, and fight-
ing, on every side, and all is for your / sake; you had need look to yourself, 
charge, you’ll be / stol’n away sleeping else shortly” (1.2.63–66). Yet there are 

139
130                                         Jennifer A. Low

few, if any, scenes in which Annabella’s suitors aggressively enter upon her 
solitude.30 When Giovanni and Annabella discover their mutual affection, 
they do so in their father’s hall. This space, which is neutral ground to each, 
enables them to meet without intrusion on the  part of either. (Indeed, one 
could read Annabella’s willingness to make her brother her erotic choice as an 
extreme example of endogamy that makes it unnecessary for her ever to leave 
the family circle.) When the two have pledged their love, they exit, presum-
ably to consummate their vow. But the next scene stages not their act of love 
but the low comedy of Bergetto’s indifference to Annabella. Directly follow-
ing that scene, Giovanni and Annabella enter “as from their chamber”; they 
renew their vows and agree to remain faithful to one another. Thus, the audi-
ence is denied the revelation of Annabella’s body. Instead, it enjoys a parodic 
inversion of Giovanni’s courtship. The staging seems to reflect back on the 
audience its prurient desire for the unveiled sex scene that the play initially 
seemed to promise. As Patricia Fumerton argues, the subject at this time

       lived in  public view but always withheld for itself a “secret” room, 
       cabinet, case, or other  recess locked away (in full  view) in  one 
       corner of  the house. . . .  the aristocratic self [enacted] a sort of 
       ref lex of retreat, an instinct to withdraw into privacy so pervasive 
       even in the most trivial matters that there never could be any final 
       moment of privacy.31

It  seems that this  private room  will  never be revealed. Even to  Putana, 
Annabella pointedly  refuses to offer  any confidence about the  details of 
what has passed.
       Despite their  urgent desire to win the  prize, Annabella’s other suitors 
gain little access to her. Almost the only contact that Grimaldi achieves oc-
curs when Annabella and Putana enter “above” after his fight with Vasques. 
The stage direction strongly implies that the two women peer down at the 
fight from  an upper window or a balcony overlooking the street. Annabella 
remains “above” the violence, and apart from it—never seriously threatened. 
Her meeting with Bergetto is only recounted, not staged; true, Annabella is 
later summoned by her father to read the youth s letter, but after doing so, 
she is permitted to dismiss the suitor without  further  ado. When Soranzo 
courts Annabella, they walk in her father’s hall; her sense of security is evi-
dent in her  raillery. Even when her husband discovers her previous sexual 

“ activity, Annabella remains calm. Stage directions indicate their entrance: 
 Enter Soranzo unbrac’d, and Annabella dragg’d in” (4.3.1 s.d.). We can de-
duce that they enter from a shared bedchamber after their mutual disrobing 
reveals Annabella’s condition. The fact that Ford does not stage the scene in 
the bedchamber itself emphasizes that Soranzo fails to penetrate Annabella’s 

140
                              “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor                       131

defenses. She steadfastly refuses to  name her  lover  and sings a song  that  in-
dicates her indifference   to death. Despite  their  wedding,  Soranzo  never gains 
access to Annabella’s interior   self.
        Annabella’s   bedchamber  is  not  represented  onstage until   the  scene of 
her repentance.  The stage  direction   says, “Enter  the  Friar  sitting   in  a chair, 
Annabella  kneeling   and  whispering   to  him:   a table  before  them  and  wax-
lights:  she weeps and  wrings  her  hands” (3.6.1   s.d.).32 The scene plunges in 

. medias res as the Friar comments, “You have unripp’d a soul so foul and  guilty 
 . . I  marvel how  / The  earth hath  borne  you up” (3.6.2–4).  He  dominates  the 
scene with  speeches punctuated only  occasionally  by exclamations  from   An-
nabella, graphically  describing   hell and  its torments   until  Annabella   asks, “Is 
there no  way  left  to  redeem my  miseries?”  (3.6.33).33 His  answer persuades 
her that  marrying   Soranzo  is  the right   choice:  when  the  Friar  asks if  she is 
content, she replies, “I  am” (3.6.42).34
        Though   the   stage  direction    indicates  that   Annabella    and  the   Friar 
appear onstage together,  the pose described  and the  speeches that follow   in-
dicate that   Annabella’s  concealed subjectivity   has  finally  been  revealed. The 
scene depicts what we have long  desired to  see: Annabella’s bedchamber. This 
feminized  space is indeed penetrated  by an aggressive male—the Friar,  whose 
coercive speeches constitute   an  assault upon  Annabella’s   privacy. But   what 
is exposed inside  this  sancta sanctorum is not  Annabella’s  body  but  her  soul. 
The long-awaited  revelation  of  Annabella’s self  presents not an overly-willing 
woman but  a thoughtful   one. The Friar’s  concerns gain him  access to a purely 
spiritual  interior.
        Yet this  understanding  of  Annabella  is undermined   by the play’s conclu-
sion. Ford  parts  the  bed  curtains  in  5.5, revealing  Giovanni    and Annabella 
in  bed once  again.35 There is  no  need for   Giovanni   to  make  an  aggressive 
entrance; he  has already taken  possession of  Annabella’s  body. Now,  on  this 
bed, Annabella’s inner  space is reconstituted,  this  time  in an erotic  guise, and, 
as the lovers use the time  they have, they re-enact  the primal   act, staging An-
nabella as a body  entered  and conquered  by  a male. Stabbing  her,  Giovanni 
penetrates the  body  violently   as well  as sexually, killing   the  fetus, the  inter-
loper whose presence brought   Soranzo into  Annabella’s  sphere (“The  hapless 
fruit   /  That  in  her  womb  receiv’d  its  life  from   me  /  Hath   had  from   me  a 
cradle and  a grave” [5.5.94–96]).   Annabella’s  interiority    is turned  inside  out, 
as the staging  places her  body  on  display  and the  script   suggests that  what 
matters  for  Giovanni   is  not  his sister’s  soul, but  her  body. The  space of the 
stage represents Annabella’s interior   once again, but  that interior   seems more 
appropriately  figured  by her  genitalia  than  by her heart.
        The  heart itself  reappears at  the end.  Shrunk  down  to  the actual  organ, 
however, interiority    retains  unknowability.   What   is internal   is, as Katharine 
Maus says, “beyond scrutiny, concealed  where other  people cannot  perceive it. 

141
132                                         Jennifer A. Low

And it surpasses the visible—its validity is unimpeachable.”36 When Giovanni 
enters the stage “with a heart upon his dagger” (5.5.7 s.d.), the tableau inevi-
tably recalls the scene in which Giovanni urged Annabella to discover the 
truth of his, feelings by cutting open his body to see his heart. The trope of the 
heart as the seat of love, so common in the verses of Sidney, Shakespeare, and 
Donne, is here literalized. Thus, Giovanni presents to all his triumph:

                                      The  glory of my deed
       Darken’d the midday sun, made noon as night.
                                      . . . 
       I  came to feast too, but I digg’d for food
       In  a much richer mine than gold or stone
       Of  any value balanc’d; ’tis a heart,
       A  heart, my lords, in which is mine entomb’d:
       Look  well upon’t; dee know’t?                                    (5.6.22–29)

The speech leads us to expect a bawdy pun—surely the “richer mine” must 
refer to Annabella’s queynt. But  Ford surprises us by altering  the  mean-
ing of the  container once again: Giovanni is proud that  he has conquered 
Annabella’s affections. The “case” is not  the vulva  but  the  heart, which 
Giovanni believes will offer the pure, unequivocal sign of authentic feeling 
that he desires. But, of course, it does not. Even Giovanni’s father fails to 
recognize Annabella’s heart (as Giovanni says, “Why d’ee startle? / I vow ’tis 
hers” [5.6.31–32]). When presented onstage, the heart is just a bloody hunk 
of flesh: it lacks any identifying trait, let alone the symbolic value that it has 
for Giovanni himself.37
       On  a  theatrical level, one that  comprises both plot  and staging, the 
revelation of Annabella’s interiority, though deferred for  a while, is finally 
reached—and is reached, in fact, more than once. Annabella’s interiority is 
not only visible, but actually staged when her room and her bed are revealed 
onstage. As Georgiana Ziegler has said in her discussion of The Rape of Lu-
crece, “the chamber metaphorically represents her ‘self,’ her body with its 
threatened chastity.”38 But in this play, the “self ” is represented as several dif-
ferent constructs. It may be the soul, the conscience, the genitals, the womb. 
Is fancy bred in the heart, in the head, inside the vagina? Ford cannot decide: 
his stagings shift the seat of the self from one thing to another. Annabella’s 
interiority  remains a moving target; her characterization is nowhere more 
ambiguous than at the play’s end.
       ’Tis  Pity draws on  the conventions of the  morality  play to stage the 
female aristocratic body and to examine the nature of the subjectivity repre-
sented by that body. It also resembles the morality play in the psychological 

142
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              133

distance that it maintains between the characters and the audience. Despite, 
or perhaps because of, the play’s sensationalism, ’Tis Pity remains largely an 
intellectual exercise for the audience member, a quest for the nature of Anna-
bella’s subjectivity. Unlike Macbeth, for example, ’Tis Pity offers no entrance 
into the focal character’s experience but remains a cautionary lesson not un-
like morality plays themselves.
       If   ’Tis Pity  does offer the audience a role, it is  that of  the  onlooker, 
the peeping Tom whose desires have been legitimized because commodi-
fied. What aspect of Annabella do we desire to see? Giovanni’s desire may 
awaken our prurience, but the incestuous nature of his desire makes us ex-
perience any touch of kinship with Giovanni as distasteful. Even more than 
its gore and its subject matter, the position in  which it  places its audience 
members may be the element that links ’Tis Pity with an Artaudian Theatre 
of Cruelty. Do we watch with Giovanni or over his shoulder? And in which 
of these capacities are we more (or less) akin to him? This challenge to the 
spectator’s role—when we are both enticed and sickened by our willingness 
to be enticed—leads to larger questions about theatrical transactions between 
actors and spectators. What draws us into the action? And how are our rela-
tions with the characters altered when we are? Do we empathize with each 
character seriatim or with only one, enjoying a dual viewpoint as we relate to 
the other characters through the lens that “our” character provides? No matter 
what the action, it is evident that as soon as one actor establishes a relation to 
another, he alters their spatial relations and realigns the audience with each of 
them. As Hollis Huston explains,

       To  transfer Hall’s comprehensive analysis of behavior directly to 
       the  stage [would be] a catastrophic mistake. A stage differs from 
       real life in a way that is essentially proxemic. . . . [T]he fundamental 
       relationship of the theater is not between two actors, but between 
       the two of them and those who watch: when the contract of mutual 
       responsibility is broken, the stage dies and the theater is void.39

Any consideration of staging is incomplete without  discussion of its effect 
upon the spectators. By extension, discussion of the body and its use in the 
theater should also include the spectator as a third element, forming a triad 
of related concerns.
       Many  antitheatrical pamphleteers who feared that dramas could have a 
bad effect upon audience members inveighed against what they perceived as 
a loss of control that resulted from watching plays. Stephen Gosson, for ex-
ample, writes repeatedly of the danger of “gazing.” In Playes Confuted in Five 
Actions, he alludes four times to the effect of the spectacle—or, more exactly, 
to the effects of gazing upon a spectacle:

143
134                                         Jennifer A. Low

       Yf  we be carefull that no  pollution of  idoles enter by the mouth 
       into  our bodies, how diligent, how circumspect, how wary ought we 

       & to be, that no corruption of idols, enter by the passage of our eyes 
            eares into the soule? . . . that which entreth into us by the eyes 
       and eares, muste bee digested by the spirite.40

       Phillip  Stubbes perceives the theatrical experience similarly: “For such 
is our grosse and dull nature, that what thing we see opposite before our eyes, 
to pearce further, and printe deeper in our harts and minds, than that thing, 
which is hard [sic]  onely with  the eares.”41 Both these writers characterize 
sight as a way of opening up the body, as if the eye were a mouth that in-
gests visual stimuli. Sight becomes an invitation for stimuli to enter into the 
body: a “piercing,” or penetration. To make sense of the assault upon the self 
that these writers see in the very experience of play-watching, I revert to the 
relation between what Hall calls “distance receptors—those concerned with 
examination of distant objects—the eyes, the ears, and the nose” and “im-
mediate receptors—those used to examine the world close up—the world of 
touch, the sensations we receive from the skin, membranes, and muscles” for 
early modern theatergoers.42
       How  would early modern audience members have experienced the dra-
ma at the physiological and visceral levels? At the sensorial level? Based on 

“ the contract for constructing the Fortune Theater, Bruce Smith asserts that 
 no one in the Fortune or the 1599 Globe was more than fifty feet from an 
actor standing downstage, at the focal center of the space.”43 Though this dis-
tance may have been small in terms of auditory experience, it is experienced 

“ proxemically as somewhat remote, falling under the category that Hall calls 
 public distance” the distance at which people lose a sense of connectedness 
with one another.44 According to Hall’s research, actors attempting to make 
their performance touch the spectator work with the limitations established 
by that distance:

       Most  actors know that at thirty  or more feet the subtle shades of 
       meaning conveyed by the normal voice are lost as are the details of 
       facial expression and movement. Not only the voice but everything 
       else must  be exaggerated or amplified. Much  of  the nonverbal 
       part  of the communication shifts to  gestures and body stance. In 
       addition, the tempo of the voice drops [and] words are enunciated 
       more clearly.45

But for groundlings  already in intimate  contact with the  stage, the actor’s 
approach onto the platea (downstage area) of the stage would intensify the 
experience of closeness resulting from the actor’s approach within  social 

144
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              135

distance. Hall  characterizes the physical experience of  such intimacy  as 
somewhat uncomfortable—certainly, it takes active observation to form an 
impression of what is nearby. At a close social distance,

       the  area of sharp  focus extends to the  nose and parts of  both 
       eyes; or the whole mouth, one eye, and the nose are sharply seen. 
       Many  Americans shift their  gaze back and forth from eye to eye 
       or from  nose to mouth. . . . At a 60-degree visual angle, the head, 
       shoulders, and upper trunk are seen at a distance of four feet.46

Perhaps most significantly, Hall notes that “to stand and look down at a per-
son at this distance has a domineering effect.”47 One can easily extrapolate 
from this (and from one’s personal experience) that craning one’s neck upward 
to watch a performance would render one submissive to impressions.
       In  the  public theaters, the thrust  stage aggressively appropriated the 
standing room of the audience. A raised platform jutting forty feet out into 
a bare area, the stage must have served as a physical intrusion upon the per-
sonal space of those spectators pressed close to it. Despite the excitement 
of proximity, those who stood around its actual perimeter would have been 
uncomfortable at being pressed against the hard wooden platform—more so 
than those more distant spectators who were pressed back against the walls of 
the amphitheater. Surrounded by groundlings on three sides, an actor could 
not possibly achieve the same visual effect as one performing toward only one 
side. Yet in this case, the audience would be much more affected by actors’ 
entrances, particularly when they passed from locus (upstage area) to platea 
(downstage area) for greater intimacy. These paired concepts are particularly 
suggestive in this context. Robert Weimann argues that the platea “becomes 
part of  the symbolic meaning of  the play world, and  the locus is made to 
support the dialectic of self-expression and representation.” In moving from 
one to another, actors employed “transitions between illusion and convention, 
representation and self-expression, high seriousness, and low comedy—each 
drawing physically, socially, and dramatically on the interplay.” Further, Wei-
mann suggests, an early modern actor “uses certain conventions of speech and 
movement that roughly correspond to locus and platea, conventions by which 
the audience’s world is made part of the play and the play is brought into the 
world of the audience.”48
       How  might  specific scenarios or stagings further compel the audience 
to open themselves up in the way that Gosson and Stubbes describe? Can the 
audience themselves be penetrated by their experience of the theater? Not, one 
might suspect, in seats of the nineteenth-century proscenium arch theater, 
watching actors in the crowded Victorian setting of the typical box set—but 
perhaps in the crowd surrounding the  early modern amphitheater’s thrust 

145
136                                         Jennifer A. Low

stage, when a bare stage awaits the actor’s entrance, which will shape the area 
into meaningful space.
       Not  all theatrical entrances convey a sense of aggressive penetration, of 
course (least of all when characters enter in the midst of conversation), but 
a solitary actor might achieve this effect, particularly when the scene was set 
for aggressive entry by previous imagery, conversation, setting, or the mode of 
earlier entrances.49 Further, in moving from locus to platea, an actor not only 
penetrates an empty stage but also steps into and above space that the audi-
ence would experience as their own. Gurr seems to support this view when he 
argues, “The chief feature of the staging and its interaction with the audience 
was the intimate connection between them. The spectators were as visible as 
the players, and even more potently they completely surrounded the players 
on their platform.”50
       More  than once throughout his dramatic career, Shakespeare created a 
representative body onstage that stands in for the audience, thereby enabling 
him to use the material conditions of his theater to manipulate the spectator’s 
proxemic experience. How might the linkage of stage entrances to thematic 
concerns with penetration and invasion of the body have brought the audience 
to share the proxemic experience of the onstage (intradramatic) spectator?
       Shakespeare’s Coriolanus not only makes use of a mob as an intradra-
matic spectator, it constantly thematizes the relationship between crowds and 
individuals, parts and wholes, closed bodies and open bodies. Piercing and 
penetration remain an underlying theme  of the  play, as Shakespeare con-
stantly draws our  attention to  openness, vulnerability, autonomy, and the 
necessity for solidarity.  In Coriolanus, the hero wins his name by penetrating 
and opening up the town of Corioles, but he refuses to render himself vulnerable 
to figurative penetration. He resists the traditional theatrical vulnerability of 
the soliloquizer, in itself a metaphorical openness to penetration;51 he refuses 
to show his wounds to the populace, blocking their gaze (a visual and sym-
bolic form of penetration); and he ignores the needs of both the metaphorical 
stomach (the desires of the Roman populace) and those of the literal stomach 
(food as fuel for the body), thereby refusing to acknowledge that the body 
can be affected by external, or even internal, stimuli.52 Martius’s refusal to 
acknowledge his vulnerability is most notable in the showstopping scene in 
which he successfully penetrates the town of Corioles entirely alone.
       Entrances and exits almost immediately become symbolic of thematic 
concerns throughout the play. Coriolanus begins with action, possibly rein-
forced by confused sound: “Enter  a company of mutinous  Citizens, with 
staves, clubs, and other weapons.”53 This is, as Arden editor Philip Brockbank 
notes, the only play of the period to open with public violence.54 And, as critic 
Jarrett Walker points out, the audience experiences this beginning as “a fron-
tal assault of bodies.”55 From an empty stage, we change to a confused milling 

146
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              137

about of hostile, angry characters—as many extras as the King’s Men had on 
hand. This would have been experienced as violence, as attack; the audience 
would have felt the shock of reverberating boards, of crowdedness very differ-
ent from that of the spectators crammed together.56

“ Indeed,     Zvi  Jagendorf suggests that Shakespeare purposely contrasts the 
 isolated and discrete body of the man who stands alone” with the common 
body of the people:57

       Both  are prominent features of the play’s spectacle. The crowd—
       the  citizens in the  street and marketplace, the common soldiers 
       on  the battlefield—is  a constant feature of the action.  We hear 
       their  shouts on and offstage. We are encouraged to imagine them 
       jostling  for space in the victory parades, and we both see and hear 
       them in  the mob scenes.58

Shakespeare, I am suggesting, brings together crowds and the figure of the 
body by creating scenes in which crowds and (ultimately) the whole stage 

’ come to “stand in” for a body, as Ford does through different techniques in 
Tis Pity She’s a Whore. Throughout the play, the thrust stage and the actors 
create situations in which penetration of groups of bodies occurs. The open-
ing is a case in point: after the  unruly multitude  have assembled, they are 
called to order by the First Citizen, who addresses the crowd. Whether they 
stand in small clusters or assemble in a circle or semicircle, it is natural for 
the next character who appears, Menenius, to enter from the back and push 
through to the center of a crowd that then surrounds him. His  penetration 
of the crowd is his first move toward controlling and dispersing it. In enter-
ing and taking  center stage, in fact, he seems to provide a visual emblem 
of the belly in his  fable. He becomes the visual center, around which there 
would be a circle of empty space because the plebeians would have to stand 
far enough off so that they could turn  their eyes upon him.59 When Caius 
Martius enters, he too would necessarily thrust his way through the crowd 
of plebeians, but his presence would confuse the effect of the tableau. The 
conversation would cease to be a dialogue between individual and crowd; 
it would become more diffuse, less of a clear exchange, as Martius quarrels 
both with Menenius and with  members of the crowd.
       Entering  and exiting become the subject of discussion a scant two scenes 
later, when Virgilia insists, “I’ll not over the threshold till my lord return from 
the wars” (1.3.74–75). Although Valeria argues, “Fie, you confine yourself 
most unreasonably,” Virgilia stands firm (1.3.76). Refusing to visit “the good 
lady that lies in” (1.3.77), Virgilia insists on her own enclosure, her own con-
tainment. Walker actually comments that Virgilia’s silence itself is visual and 
emblematic when framed by her talkative friend and her mother-in-law:

147
138                                         Jennifer A. Low

       She is never fully  separable from the women who surround her. 
       Accordingly,  when I refer to  Virgilia  as a presence onstage, it is 
       with  the understanding that Volumnia and Valeria are essential to 
       draw our  attention to that  presence and are thus, in phenomenal 
       terms, inseparable from it.60

Even in this scene, a closed circle is more than once broken in upon: Volum-
nia and Virgilia  enter together, their paired-ness making us focus on their 
interaction rather  than on  their  penetration of  the empty  stage. But the 
stage directions (which textual critics as venerable as Greg and as recent as 
Werstine believe to have been written by Shakespeare himself) indicate that 
the pair seat themselves on stools and begin to sew silently, creating a sense 
of intimacy and community broken by Volumnia s first  words: “I pray you, 
daughter, sing, or express yourself ” (1.3.1–2). The circle is again disrupted 
when a servant enters to announce Valeria’s arrival and Virgilia is with diffi-
culty prevented from exiting the stage. When Valeria appears with an Usher 
and a Gentlewoman (presumably Valeria’s servant), the previous intimacy is 
dissolved by the presence of too many bodies on stage.
       In  the next scene, the sense of the stage space that I have described is 
reversed. Scene 1.4 stages the Roman attack upon Corioles. As well as the 
main actors, the stage directions specify “Drum and Colours [extras], with 
Captains and Soldiers . . . to them a Messenger.” The army of the Volsces, 
which soon pours out of the  tiring-house door, further  confuses the visual 

“ picture. They beat the Romans “to their trenches,” and then Martius appears, 
 cursing”; he pursues the Volsces, who flee back to the gates of Corioles (the 
doors of the tiring-house), and he follows them in. As the gates are shut and 
the Roman general Titus Lartius immediately focuses on the possible loss of 
Martius, the characters and the audience can only speculate on what is going 
on behind the door in  “Corioles.” Martius’s own powers of penetration are 
best perceived by the audience not when he is fighting onstage but now, when 
he is absent and all eyes are fixed upon the door through which he has passed. 
Ironically, our attention  is not  directed toward  the penetration of  swords 
piercing bodies behind the door; instead, we see the city of Corioles itself as 
the thing that Martius has penetrated by entering it. Thus, the city becomes a 
larger emblem of the cutting, wounding, and opening up of individual bodies 
that Martius  traditionally  enacts in battle. As I have shown elsewhere, the 
penetration indicated by the wound’s blood is a matter for shame, as it reveals 
masculine vulnerability—a vulnerability associated, according to Gail Paster, 
with a woman’s menstrual flow.61
       When   Martius  emerges, “bleeding, assaulted by the enemy” (1.4.61 
s.d.), the general Titus Lartius exclaims, “O, ’tis Martius! / Let’s  fetch him 
off, or make remain alike,” and the company of Roman soldiers rush toward 

148
                           “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor              139

Martius, who turns and leads them all back into  the city  (1.4.61–62). This 
action inverts the more usual sense of the stage as an area that can be pen-
etrated; instead, it focuses the watchers’ attention on a single point of exit or 
entry. The possibility of forced penetration is outward—through the tiring-
house doors—but yet away from the audience. Thus, as Titus Lartius enters, 
the extras pause, facing toward the door through which Martius has passed. 
When he re-enters and turns about, they all follow him, and the flow of actors 
abruptly pushes toward the single, central door, leaving the stage as empty as if 
it had been evacuated. I hypothesize an effect as of tumescence and detumes-
cence—not in literal terms, but in the audience’s experience of the stage.62 As 
the circulation of bodies onstage focuses on action occurring directly behind 
the doors, the audience would not only focus on what the doors concealed, 
but would experience the cessation of action as an abrupt slowdown—one 
that they  might even understand as resembling a sudden chill to  flowing 
blood. They would feel the stage’s detumescence as a sudden emptying out, 
an absence of tension in the immediate vicinity and a sense of closure to the 
scene that is suggested by the outflow, which, on a primitive level, would carry 
a sense of the Romans’ attack as almost inevitably successful.
       In  architectonic terms, the staging implied by the action of Coriolanus 
manifests two different ways of dwelling in space. Edward S. Casey character-
izes two extremes of architectural experience as “hestial” and “hermetic”: “Any 
built place that aims at encouraging hestial dwelling will . . . tend to be at once 
centered and self-enclosed. The implicit directionality will be from the center 
toward the periphery and will thus obey the architectural counsel to ‘extend 

“ inner order outward.’”63 In contrast, “the hermetic moves out resolutely”; it 
 represents the far-out view, a view from a moving position.”64 Shakespeare 
offers both these experiences to his audiences through the proxemics inherent 
in the staging examined here. Each form of experience affects watchers viscer-
ally, and each develops a sense of self substantially different from that of the 
region “between or behind the eyes.”65
       The staging of the body affects the audience’s experience on many levels. 
While  related to proxemic concerns, the effect of entrances and exits goes 
beyond that single dimension; it depends not only on proximity but on the 
design and use of the stage within the theater itself. Thus, the stage space, 
whether that of the thrust  stage or the proscenium arch, organically affects 
the experience of the spectator, as each stage design creates a different relation 
between the audience and the action.
       The self implicated by early modern metaphors of the body is not easily 
defined, any more than is the self that comes into being through proxemic ex-
perience. Yet the validity of applying proprioceptive analysis to staging should 
be evident. Freud’s paradigms have so thoroughly infused our culture that one 
is likely to describe the audience’s proprioception as an unconscious response 

149
140                                              Jennifer A. Low

to the  staging of  the action.  Such  a term denies  the nature  of the  experience, 
which  is  unrelated  to  psychic  structures  or intellectual    activity. The  “bodili-
ness” if  you  will,  of  the  individual    is  an important    constitutive   element   of 
subjectivity—a   subjectivity   that  must  be recognized  as a broader  experience 
than has been understood  hitherto.
        Scholars  who  have  written   about  the  early  modern  spectator’s  experi-
ence have often intuitively    done so in  the context  of  considering  bodily,  even 
proprioceptive,   elements  onstage. Not   only  does Belsey  discuss the  uses of 
psychomachiae in  The Subject of Tragedy, she treats similar issues in her analy-

“ sis of The Duchess of Malfi, a play whose focus could be defined as the question, 
 Who   controls   the  body  of  the  Duchess?”  When   Huston   Diehl   addresses 
audience experience,  she  does so  in  the  context  of  her  discussion  of   stage 
violence.66 We must continue  to  examine  how spatial  elements  construct  the 
subject, using  the  drama  both  as a mimetic   form   and  as an intraperforma-
tive transaction   between actors  and audience  members. The staged nature  of 
dramatic  theater  offers  a unique   opportunity    to examine  this   dimension  of 
human experience.

                                                         Notes

         1. Quotations from Bussy D’Ambois refer to George Chapman, Bussy D’Ambois 
ed. Robert J. Lordi (Lincoln,  Nebr.: Nebraska University Press, 1964). This edition 
is based on Q2, published in 1641.
         2.  Quotations  from  Romeo and Juliet and other Shakespeare plays (unless 
otherwise noted) refer to  William   Shakespeare, The Riverside Shakespeare, ed. G. 
Blakemore Evans (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,  1974).
         3. At   5.3.48 s.d., Q1  states, “Romeo begins to open the tomb.”  At  5.3.87, 
Theobald includes the stage direction, “Laying Paris in the tomb.” Q1 also specifies 
at 5.3.139 the stage direction “Friar  stoops and looks on the blood  and weapons” 
directly before the Friar’s line, “Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains / The 
stony entrance of this sepulchre?” (140–141). Two lines later, the Douai MS offers 
the stage direction, “Enters the  tomb.” The  many references to the tomb indicate 
that it was represented by a physical structure, for which the obvious choice would 
have been the  tiring-house.   Based on  similarly   circumstantial  evidence, Gurr 
confidently asserts that the tiring-house  front  “served as the Capulet house when 

[ Romeo climbed to its balcony” (Andrew Gurr, The Shakespearean Stage, 1574–1642 
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992], 182).
         4. This  point may be somewhat negated by the argument about bedchambers 
espoused by Michael Danahy in “Social, Sexual, and Human Spaces in La Princesse 
de Cleves,” French Forum 6, no. 3 (Sept. 1981): 212–224. Yet Danahy’s point is also 
mine: when female courtiers  lack any private  space, and even lack the ability  to 
decide who may enter their bedroom and  who may not,  they may fail  adequately 
to develop an interior space, a sense of self that is distinct from the directions and 
wishes of others.
         5. See Andrew Gurr, The Shakespearean Stage, 160. As Gurr points out, “after 
the adults took [the Blackfriars playhouse] over in 1608 swordplay was confined to 

150
                              “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor                       141

the occasional fencing bout and . . . battles and what Shirley called ‘target fighting’ 
were never tried there” (157). The size of the stage provides one explanation for why 
Bussy’s epic duel in act 2 is described, not staged.
           6. Consider the “boudoir atmosphere” (to coin a useful anachronism) of such 
settings as Clerimont’s dressing room in Jonson’s Epicoene, the Duchess’s closet in 
Webster’s Duchess of Malfi, and Tamyra’s closet in this play.
           7. Indeed, the line may even have been intended as a reference to the golden 
statues that apotheosize the lovers at the close of Romeo and Juliet.
           8.  Sigmund  Freud, Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis, trans. and ed. 
James Strachey (New York: Norton, 1966), 156.
           9. Anne  Ubersfeld, Reading Theatre, trans. Frank Collins, ed. Paul Perron 
and Patrick Debbeche (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999), 110.
         10. These symbolic structures persist beyond Bussy’s death. After her lover’s 
decease, Tamyra begs to depart from her husband’s house. Having failed to keep her 
affair hidden, her bedroom matters private, she urges her husband to let her depart 
until  her stab wounds—“that  never balm shall  close / Till   death hath  enter’d at 
them, so I love them, / Being  opened by your hands”—heal (5.4.194–196). Having 
been grotesquely penetrated by her husband’s phallic knife, Tamyra promises to bear 
lovingly these signs of his ownership, his right to enter her body exclusively, and in 
any way he wishes. She pledges, “I never more will grieve you with my sight, / Never 
endure that any roof shall part /  Mine  eyes and heaven; but to the open deserts, / 
Like to a hunted tigress, I will fly” (5.4.197–200). Leaving behind the empty shell of 
a place that failed to offer her protection, she seeks the promise of nakedness that the 
wilderness seems to offer. After Bussy’s death, she no longer needs any private place. 
Violated by her husband’s knife and by his base murder of her lover, Tamyra becomes 
a walking emblem of a woman who has nothing to hide, a woman whose interiority 
contains nothing but a bleakness that she is willing to share with the world.
         11.  Catherine   Belsey, The  Subject of Tragedy: Identity  and Difference in 
Renaissance Drama (London: Methuen,  1985), 13.  Michael  Hattaway  looks  to 
the future,  borrowing  the term gest from  Brecht to  characterize “moments when 
the visual elements of the scene combine with the  dialogue in  a significant  form 
that reveals the condition of life  in the play” (Elizabethan Popular Theatre: Plays in 
Performance [London: Routledge, 1982], 57).
         12.  Catherine  Belsey, “Emblem  and  Antithesis  in  The  Duchess of Malfi” 
Renaissance Drama 11 (1980): 117.

“ 13.        As  an example, the  OED  cites Hall’s  Chronicles, from Richard III,  56: 
 With   out resistence, [we] have penetrate [sic] the  ample region .  .  . of  Wales.” 
The French cognate was also commonly used at this time to mean “to enter into a 
space.”
         14. George Puttenham,  The Arte of English Poesie (Kent, Ohio: Kent  State 
University Press, 1970), 159.
         15. Many critics, following Gail  Kern Paster’s groundbreaking book, The Body 
Embarrassed: Drama and the Disciplines of Shame in Early Modern England (Ithaca: 
Cornell  University Press, 1993), have investigated the relation  between selfhood 
and early modern humoral theory. My approach attempts to focus on actual physical 
perception rather than on the physiological discourse of the time.
         16. Belsey, The Subject of Tragedy, 14.
         17. Paster, The Body Embarrassed, 3.

151
142                                              Jennifer A. Low



( 18.        Henri  Lefebvre, The Production of Space, trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith 
 Oxford: Blackwell,  1991), 1.
         19. Ibid.
         20.  Cynthia  Marshall,  The Shattering of the Self: Violence, Subjectivity, and 
Early Modern Texts (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002), 14.
         21. Paster, The Body Embarrassed, 5.
         22.  Hollis  Huston,  The Actor’s Instrument: Body, Theory, Stage (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan  Press, 1992), 112. For more specifics, see Edward T. Hall, 
The Hidden Dimension (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1966). Hall discusses 

( different cultures in Europe  (123–138), Japan (139–144), and the  Middle   East 
 144–153).

( 23.         Pierre Bourdieu,  Outline  of a  Theory of Practice, trans.  Richard  Nice 
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), 94.
         24. Ruth Kelso, Doctrine for the Lady of the Renaissance (Urbana, Ill.: University 
of Illinois  Press, 1956), 43–44.
         25.  In  The Family, Sex, and Marriage in  England, 1500–1800 (New  York: 
Harper,  1977), Lawrence  Stone quotes Lady  Jane Grey  as complaining  of  her 
parents’ rigorous and even apparently spiteful discipline:

         When I  am in  presence either of father or mother, whether I speak, keep 
         silence, sit, stand or go, eat, drink, be merry or sad, be sewing, playing, dancing, 
         or doing anything else, I must do it, as it were, in such weight, measure, and 
         number, even so perfectly as God made the world, else I am so sharply taunted, 
         so cruelly threatened, yea presently sometimes with pinches, nips and bobs, and 
         some ways I will not name for the honour I bear them, so without measure 
         misordered that I think myself in Hell. (167)

         26.  Jennifer A.  Low,  Manhood and the Duel:  Masculinity in  Early Modern 
Drama and Culture (New York: Palgrave, 2003), 73–74.
         27. Hall,  The Hidden Dimension, 121.
         28. In  1.1, Giovanni asks the Friar whether “[a] customary form . . . [should] 
be a bar / ’Twixt my perpetual happiness and me?” (1.1.25–27). Since his happiness is 
in the enjoyment of Annabella’s body, his reference to a bar implies that he conceives 
of his sister’s body as a room with the entrance barred by the traditional prohibition 
against incest. Later,  when  Giovanni  learns  of  Annabella’s pregnancy, he asks 
Putana, horrified,  “But in  what case is she?” (3.3.17). In this instance, the double 
meaning is the author’s, not the character’s. The term clearly refers to Annabella’s 
body as container—not, this time, an empty container with space for the phallus but 
a full container, bearing the child that is the result of his “filling”   her.
         29. All  quotations from ’Tis Pity She’s a Whore refer to John Ford, ’Tis Pity She’s 
a Whore, ed. N. W. Bawcutt (Lincoln,  Nebr.: University  of Nebraska Press, 1966). 
This edition is based on Q1, authored by Ford himself.
         30. In  contrast, consider the scene in The Duchess of Malfi when Ferdinand 
enters the Duchess’s chamber just as she, speaking to Antonio, says, “You have cause 
to love me, I  ent’red you into my heart”  (  John Webster, The Duchess of Malfi, ed. 

“ Elizabeth Brennan, [New York: Norton, 1993], 3.2.61). As Judith Haber comments, 
 When Ferdinand enters that space, uninvited and ‘unseen, he forcibly reappropriates 
her body/room/stage and defines it as his container—the empty, passive receptacle 
that is the ground of his existence. . . . At this point, understandably, the Duchess’s 

152
                              “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor                       143

speech undergoes a radical change” (“‘My  Body Bestow upon  my Women’: The 
Space of the  Feminine  in  The Duchess of Mafi,”  Renaissance Drama 28 [1997]: 
144). Georgianna Ziegler also pursues this line  of  reasoning in her discussion of 
Cymbeline. “For Iachimo,  a woman’s body is part and parcel of her room and can 
be similarly violated. Though he does not physically rape Imogen, we nevertheless 
feel that a rape has been committed in his voyeuristic intrusion on her privacy” (“My 
Lady’s Chamber: Female Space, Female Chastity in Shakespeare,” Textual Practice 
4, no. 1 [1990]: 82).
         31.  Patricia  Fumerton,   Cultural  Aesthetics: Renaissance Literature and the 
Practice of Social Ornament (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1991), 69.
         32. The  editor N.  W.  Bawcutt comments, “Q’s in his study clearly seems an 
error, as the scene takes place in Annabella’s bedroom (see 3.4.33)” (’Tis Pity She’s 
a Whore, 57). At the cited line, Florio says to the Friar, “Come, father, I’ll  conduct 
you to her chamber.”
         33. According to editor Mark  Stavig, the Friar’s speech draws substantially on 
(Ford’s poem Christ’s Bloody Sweat. See Stavig, introduction to ’Tis Pity She’s a Whore 
 Arlington  Heights, Ill.:  AHM,    1966), vii–xix.
         34.  Claudine  Defaye  sees the scene as a  representation of  psychological 
enclosure for which the Friar provides an egress: “It is as if, by conforming  to the 
role of sinner assigned by religion, terrible and constraining though it be, Annabella 
succeeded in escaping from her own intimate and immediate torment, from a kind of 
existential anguish, where all issues seem blocked” (“Annabella’s Unborn Baby: The 
Heart of the Womb in  ’Tis Pity She’s a Whore,” Cahiers élisabéthains 15 [1979]: 37).
         35.  The  scene is almost surely  set in  the  main  bedchamber in  Soranzo’s 
house.

( 36.       Katharine Eisaman Maus, Inwardness and Theater in the English Renaissance 
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 4.
         37.  Many   critics  have  attempted  to  clarify   the  personal  symbolism  of 
Giovanni’s sensationalistic gesture. Among them are Ronald Huebert, who argues 
that the gesture literalizes a flawed analogy between discovering a secret and ripping 
up a  bosom (John Ford,  Baroque English Dramatist [Montreal:   McGill-Queen’s 
University Press, 1977], 145); Michael Neill,  who makes some of the same points 

[ that I do in his effort to sort out the “welter of competing definitions and explanations 
 that the  gesture] invites” (“‘What   Strange Riddle’s This?’: Deciphering  ’Tis Pity 
She’s a Whore,” in John Ford: Critical Re-Visions, ed. Michael Neill   [Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1988], 165); and Susan J. Wiseman, who asserts that 
Annabella’s heart, for Giovanni, is “endowed . . . with all  the private and confused 
meanings of incest” (“’Tis Pity Shes a Whore: Representing the Incestuous Body,” in 
Revenge Tragedy, ed. Stevie Simkin [New York: Palgrave, 2001], 222). Wiseman’s 
article, excellent in  many ways, nonetheless unthinkingly uses spatial concepts as 
metaphor in a way that runs directly contrary to my goal of noting how space shapes 
consciousness and vice versa. Most notably, Wiseman seems to collude with Ford’s 
own rhetoric  when she asserts that, in  ’Tis Pity,  “the female body  is represented 
as an ethical,  financial,  spiritual,  amatory  and psychological territory”   and that 
Annabella’s body “is located and relocated within these competing ways of looking 
at the  body”  (215).  Like  me,  however, Wiseman  asserts that “the  significance 
of Annabella’s body  is  repeatedly transformed during  the  play by  the  powerful 
discourses which . . . define it” (216).
         38. Ziegler, “My  Lady’s Chamber,” 80.

153
144                                              Jennifer A. Low

         39. Huston, The Actor’s Instrument, 113.
         40. Stephen Gosson, Playes Confuted in Five Actions, (1582; reprint, New York: 
Garland, 1972), B8v.
         41. Phillip Stubbes, The Anatomie of Abuses (1583; reprint, New York: Garland, 
1973), A Preface to the Reader, quoted in Marshall, The Shattering of the Self, 17.
         42. Hall,  The Hidden Dimension, 40.
         43. Bruce R. Smith, The Acoustic World of Early Modern England: Attending to 
the O-Factor (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1999), 206.
         44. Hall,  The Hidden Dimension, 120.
         45. Ibid., 120.
         46. Ibid.,  114–115.
         47. Ibid., 115.
         48.  Robert Weimann,  Shakespeare and the Popular Tradition in the Theater: 
Studies in the Social Dimension of  the Dramatic Form  and  Function (Baltimore: 
Hopkins University Press, 1978), 83.
         49. As Gay McAuley  says,

         The moment of entering the presentational space is extremely important for 
         the actor as is evident from the fact that conventions have been developed 
         in  many different performance genres to heighten or mark the moment of 
         entrance. These may involve the material reality of the performance (the 
         drum roll, music flourish, and spotlight of circus or music hall) or be activated 
         from within the fiction . . . but the function is similar: to draw the spectators’ 
         attention to the physical point of entrance into the space and to mark the 
         moment in some way.

Space in Performance: Making Meaning in the Theatre (Ann Arbor:  University  of 
Michigan Press, 1999), 96.
         50. The Shakespearean Stage, 179.
         51.  Cynthia  Marshall   alludes  to  this  issue in   “Wound-man:  Coriolanus, 
Gender, and  the  Theatrical   Construction  of  Interiority,”   in   Feminist Readings 
of Early  Modern Culture, ed.  Valerie Traub,  M.   Lindsay  Kaplan,  and Dympna 
Callaghan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 95.
         52. Penetration is not the right word here, of course. Jarrett Walker’s comment 
is useful: “Ultimately,  [Coriolanus]  does not distinguish between being nourished 
and being wounded. Both are kinds of incorporation, and in both cases he responds 
by ‘spitting back’ at the world in an automatic reciprocal action, a compulsive denial 
of receptiveness” (“Voiceless Bodies and Bodiless Voices: The Drama of Human 
Perception in Coriolanus,” SQ 43, no.2 [summer 1992]:  176). These terms enable 
us, I  think,  to  perceive more accurately what mechanism is at work.  Starving, a 
related term that  invokes the process of digestion, is one of  the principal  foci  of 
Stanley Cavell’s groundbreaking essay “‘Who does the wolf  love?’ Coriolanus and 
the Interpretation of Politics,” in  Shakespeare and the Question of Theory, ed. Patricia 
Parker and Geoffrey Hartman (New York: Routledge, 1985), 245–272.
         53.  William   Shakespeare, Coriolanus, ed. Philip   Brockbank  (New  York: 
Arden, 1976; reprint, New York: Routledge, 1988), 95.
         54. Ibid.,  95.
         55. Jarrett Walker, “Voiceless Bodies and Bodiless Voices,” 172.

154
                              “Bodied Forth”: Spectator, Stage, and Actor                       145

         56. In  discussing group experiential  space, Yi-Fu Tuan asserts that crowds 
may “not detract, but enhance the significance of the events: vast numbers of people 
do not  necessarily generate the feeling of  spatial  oppressiveness” if the people’s 
reasons for being present are identical and are not directly opposed to the presence 
of others (“Space and Place: A Humanist Perspective,” in Philosophy in Geography, 
ed. Stephen Gale and Gunnar Olsson [Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1979], 404).

( 57.        Zvi Jagendorf, “Coriolanus: Body Politic and Private Parts,” SQ 41, no. 4 
 winter 1990): 462.  Similarly, Arthur   Riss argues that the play develops a “nexus 
between the land and the body,” establishing “a correspondence between the impulse 
to enclose public land and Coriolanus’s urge to enclose his body” (“The Belly Politic: 
Coriolanus and the Revolt of Language,” ELH 59, no. 1 (spring 1992]: 55).
         58. Jagendorf, “Body Politic and Private Parts,” 462. For a different point  of 
view, see Ralph Berry, who analyzes the opening and concludes “that the Roman 
crowd . . . is not the fearsome manifestation of the popular will that it might at first 
appear. There is nothing here like  the brutal  capriciousness of . . . the blood lust 
that Antony  arouses during the Forum scene. On the contrary, we see a collective 
of indeterminate and  variable characteristics” (“Casting the Crowd:  Coriolanus in 
Performance,” Assaph C4 [1988]: 114).
         59. An   alternative interpretation  of  the  scene would present the  dialogue 
between 1. Cit. and 2. Cit. center stage, surrounded by the mob. This staging would 
create a small bubble of intimacy that would either be broken by Menenius’s entrance 
or dissolve as the two  citizens  faded into  the crowd.  Michael  Warren  considers 
various possibilities for staging the citizens in his article “The Perception of Error: 
The  Editing   and  the  Performance of  the  Opening  of  ‘Coriolanus’” in   Textual 
Performances: The Modern Reproduction of Shakespeare’s Drama, ed. Lukas Erne and 
Margaret Jane Kidnie (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 127–142.
         60. Walker, “Voiceless Bodies and Bodiless Voices,” 179, n. 16.
         61. Paster, The Body Embarrassed, 92.
         62. Janet Adelman strongly endorses this view, though she is quite uninterested 
in staging and uses a psychoanalytic framework for her argument. Adelman asserts 
that

         the scene at Corioli represents a glorious transformation of the nightmare 
         of  oral vulnerability . .  . into  a  phallic adventure that both assures and 
         demonstrates his independence. Coriolanus’ battlecry as he storms the gates 
         sexualizes the scene: “Come on; / If you’ll stand fast, we’ll beat them to their 
         wives” (I.iv.40–41). But the dramatic action itself presents the conquest of 
         Corioli as an image not of rape but of triumphant rebirth.

“‘Anger’s My   Meat’:  Feeding,  Dependency, and  Aggression in   Coriolanus,” in 
Representing Shakespeare: New Psychoanalytic Essays, ed. Murray M. Schwartz and 
Coppelia Kahn [Baltimore:  Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980], 134.
         63. Edward S. Casey, Getting Back into Place: Toward a Renewed Understanding 
of the Place-World (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993), 133.
         64. Ibid.,  137–138.
         65. Edward  Casey meditates on “hereness”: “[E]ven within my lived body, I 
can distinguish a corporeally localized here from the here that is  coextensive with 
my body as a whole. At  this level, my  here is often identified  with  my head, and 

155
146                                              Jennifer A. Low

even more particularly with a region between or behind the eyes” (Getting Back into 
Place, 52).
         66. See Belsey, The Subject of Tragedy: Identity and Difference in Renaissance 
Drama; Belsey, “Emblem and  Antithesis  in The Duchess of Malfi,” 115–134; and 
Diehl, “The  Iconography of Violence in English Renaissance Tragedy,” Renaissance 
Drama 11 (1980): 27–44.

156
                          LI NA    PERKINS      WILDER


         Toward     a  Shakespearean    “Memory     Theater”:  
                         Romeo,   the   Apothecary,     and  
                         the  Performance      of  Memory 



Romeo’s  first reaction to the news of Juliet’s death is not mourning but a 
lengthy and, according to some, unnecessary recollection of an apothecary 
and the contents of his shop:

       Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight. 
       Let’s see for means. O mischief thou art swift 
       To enter in the thoughts of desperate men. 
       I do remember an apothecary—
       And hereabouts a dwells—which late I noted 
       In tatter’d weeds, with overwhelming brows, 
       Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks, 
       Sharp misery had worn him to the bones, 
       And in his needy shop a tortoise hung, 
       An alligator stuff ’d, and other skins 
       Of ill-shap’d fishes; and about his shelves 
       A beggarly account of empty boxes, 
       Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds, 
       Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses 
       Were thinly scatter’d to make up a show.         (5.1.34–48)1 


Shakespeare Quarterly, Volume 56, Number 2 (Summer 2005): pp. 156–175. Copyright © 
2005 The Johns Hopkins University Press.

                                                  147

157
148                                      Lina Perkins Wilder

       Critics  have long complained that this speech is inappropriate to Ro-
meo’s situation both practically and in its affect, that the speech has little to 
do with the acquisition of poison (the scene’s ostensible purpose) and nothing 
to do with the grief that one might expect Romeo to be feeling.2 I argue here 
that the apothecary scene is appropriate, that it does express grief, and that it 
does so by means of what I will call a “performance of memory.” 
       The apothecary scene in Romeo and Juliet is one of many performances 
of memory in Shakespeare’s plays, moments in which one character’s seem-
ingly digressive recollection momentarily displaces dramatic action. Other 
examples include the first of Justice Shallow’s scenes in 2 Henry IV (3.2); 
reminiscences of Falstaff in Henry V (2.3); Hamlet’s scenes with the Ghost 
(1.5), the First Player (2.2), and the skull of Yorick (5.1); Enobarbus’s recol-
lection of Cleopatra on the barge at Cydnus (2.2) and her “return” to Cydnus 
as she prepares for death (5.2); and Prospero’s exposition (1.2), Miranda’s 
half-memory of women (1.2), and Caliban’s dream in The Tempest (3.2). The 
function of memory scenes in Shakespeare’s plays seems to be similar to that 
of flashbacks in film: they give background and expand the work’s narrative 
frame beyond its immediate physical and temporal borders. But the differ-
ence between what the audience sees onstage and the past events the character 
is recalling creates a dissonance not present in cinematic flashbacks: stage 
memory belongs to a register of experience separate from that of represented 
action. In addition to  tying events from the play’s or the character’s past to 
those in the acted present, and to momentarily relaxing the pace of a play 
such as Romeo and Juliet, in which narrative drive is otherwise relentless,3 the 
performance of memory interrogates early modern ideas about memory and 
about theater. 
       Looking  backward over the action of the play and even toward events 
outside the play’s scope, Shakespeare’s memory theater may invite both au-
dience and actors to see the play as a dramatic whole, an effect that Tiffany 
Stern claims was unusual in the early modern English theater. “Plays seem to 
have been watched,” she writes, 

       as they were performed, with the emphasis at least as much on parts 
       as on the whole. . . . Part-oriented response is reflected in the way 
       the audience might, for instance, take objection to single characters 
       in  plays as well as to plays themselves, and in the preponderance of 
       actor-focused criticism over much of the period.4

She also notes: 

       Plays often indicate that an actor has privately learnt his role, but 
       does not know  what parts his fellow  actors are playing . . .  , or 

158
                           Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”            149

       whom he is supposed to be addressing. . . . [M]any actors, having 
       learnt to deal primarily  with their  own parts in private study, had 
       not  learnt to think of the play as a unity.5 

But Shakespeare’s performances of memory do more than counteract the 
isolating effect of part-based memorization through  having actors “recall” 
events that took place earlier in the play or words spoken by other characters. 
They actually attempt to recreate events that are not witnessed by the audi-
ence or even, in some instances, by the rememberer. 

                                I.  The  Performance of Memory 
Shakespeare’s performances of memory create a memory theater that draws 
on and then upends the imagery and the vocabulary of the memory theaters 
employed by such students of the art of memory as Giulio Camillo, Robert 
Fludd, and John Willis:   Using the  metaphor of theater, the memory  arts 
imagine, and in some cases physically construct, a spatial and visible rep-
resentation of memory. Shakespeare’s memory theater returns memory to a 
state of invisibility, inaccessibility, even mystery by refusing to provide the 
spectacle that performed remembering implies, by not allowing  us to  see 
otherwise-visible objects (such as Romeo’s “ill-shap’d fishes”).6 This is true 
not only for the theater audience, which is made to feel that it is witnessing 
an essentially private act made uncomfortably public, but for  the remem-
berer himself or herself, for whom memory becomes not a tool for retaining 
information but  a means by which forgotten or  overlooked information is 
unexpectedly recovered or even “discovered,” seemingly for the first time. 
       The  element of  the unexpected in  Shakespeare’s memory theater is 
the product of disorderly, even random recollection, a conceptualization of 
memory far from standard in the early modern period. Indeed an emphasis 
on order is so ubiquitous both in discussions of mnemonics and in physical 
treatises on the memory as to be more an assumption than a subject for argu-
ment, as we see in the work of such widely differing scholars of medieval and 
early modern memory systems as Frances Yates, Lina Bolzoni, and Mary J. 
Carruthers.7 As John Sutton has ably demonstrated, however, the equation 
between memory and order in the period is not as simple as it seems. The 
attempt to  order the memory  through artificial  means reflects a fear that 
memory could dissolve into complete disorder. The source of this disorder is 
the body.8 It was generally accepted in the early modern period that memory 
takes place in the brain, collecting in the rearmost of three or four “ventri-
cles” in which sensual impressions are formed, interrogated, and stored.9 But 
the fluidity of this place, awash in the “animal spirits” that carry information 
through and from the brain, is not conducive to order. Sutton argues that the 
methods of the memory arts are a means of liberating the mind from “the 

159
150                                      Lina Perkins Wilder

dirt added to thoughts by the body,” effected by imposing mental discipline 
and moral control.10 Should this discipline fail, one could always turn the 
page: treatises on the art of memory are nearly always paired with treatises for 
improving the natural memory through physical means. These include lists of 
recipes for treatments that can alter the physical makeup of the brain or the 
humors that make the brain too hot, too cold, too dry, or too  wet to retain 
information, along with what might be called lifestyle advice (avoid drunken-
ness, too much sleep, venery, and, according to one author, wearing dirty shoes 
to bed).11 But despite the fact that these instructions are bound in the same 
volume as treatises on the memory arts, they seem to be viewed as a separate 
solution to the body issue, even as a kind of crutch. 
       The memory arts themselves reimagine the role of the physical body not 
as the location of memory but as an observer of external, well-ordered memory 
scenes. The method of ordering provided by the memory arts is particularly 
suggestive because it offers a model for joining memory and theater, one that 
Shakespeare does not consistently exploit. Avoiding the sticky process of 
humoral correction, localist models of memory extract recollection from the 
interior of the rememberer’s body by imagining memory as an act of spectator-
ship.12 Instead of contemplating a potentially volatile interior space, memory 
artists are advised to “walk” through towns, buildings, or rooms construct-
ed in their minds and to observe them as spectators. For example, Johannes 
Romberch recommends constructing in one’s mind a town composed of a 
series of memory loci, with places such as monasteries, restaurants, churches, 
chapels, houses, and theaters.13 In many cases the memory locus is not an 
imaginary space: some memory artists advise their readers to memorize a real 
room, preferably empty, in which they can then imagine arranging memory 
objects. The influential memory artist Peter of Ravenna gives a list of rules for 
choosing a memory place: it should have windows and columns, and must be 
neither too close nor too distant, neither crowded nor too high.14 Whether 
imagined or real, a memory place functions like a map on which information 
that might otherwise fall into  disorder can be organized and easily recalled. 
The memory objects in a particular locus might represent the main points of a 
speech to be given in public; to stick to his text, the orator need only recall his 
path through the memory locus and visualize, one by one, the objects that he 
placed there, which will in turn evoke the words of his speech. 
       The ordering device of memory theater associates the memory artist’s 
spectatorship overtly with the theatrical stage. The memory theaters designed 
by Shakespeare’s contemporaries differ from their medieval predecessors in 
that they resemble London stages rather than classical amphitheaters. The 
seventeenth-century physician John Willis,   for  instance, imagines  him-
self as a spectator in front  of the theater of  his own  memory, as does his 

160
                           Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”            151

contemporary Robert Fludd. Willis’s description of his imaginary “theater” is 
striking in its physical detail: 

            A  Repository is an imaginary fabrick, fancied Artificially, built 
       of  hewen stone, in form of a Theater, the form whereof followeth; 
       suppose the Edifice to be twelve yards in length within the walls, 
       in  breadth six yards, and in height  seven yards, the roof thereof 
       flat, leaded above, and pargetted underneath, lying wholly open to 
       view, without any wall on that side supposed next us: Let there be 
       imagined a Stage of smooth gray Marble, even and variegated with a 
       party coloured border, which Stage is to be extended over the whole 
       length and breadth of the building, and raised a yard high above the 
       Level of the ground on which the said Edifice is erected. . . . 
            A   Repository according to this fashion, is to  be  represented 
       before the  eyes of our minde, wheresoever we are, as oft as we 
       intend to practise this Art; supposing our selves to stand about two 
       yards distant, against the midst thereof.15

Although the accompanying diagram indicates that Willis’s memory theater 
is a proscenium rather than a thrust  stage, its dimensions, materials, and 
open construction, along with the fact that it is raised above the level of the 
spectator, suggest the influences of stages like the ones on which Shake-
speare’s plays would have been performed. Fludd’s diagrams of his memory 
theater led Frances Yates to speculate that it was modeled on the Globe.16 
       For the purposes of the memory arts, theater is defined by its ability to 
make the internal external: as Bolzoni sees it, early modern memory inter-
nalizes that which theater “makes visible, . . . projects outward.”17 When the 
memory artist Giulio Camillo constructed a physical edifice of ordered boxes 
and shelves, Erasmus reports that he “called it a theatre because it can be seen 
with the eyes of the body.”18 Through the use of physical objects, real or imag-
ined, this “memory theater” turns the mind inside out, places it on display. As 
Camillo argues, 

       all  the things that  the human mind conceives but that cannot be 
       seen with  the eyes of the body can . . .  be expressed with some 
       bodily  signs, so that everyone can see directly with his own eyes 
       all  that which otherwise is submerged in the depths of the human 
       mind.19

       But  the  question remains just how much this  mnemonic theater has 
to do  with  the  places where plays are performed, or with  the  idea—the 
process—of performance. Frances Yates’s supposition that Fludd’s drawings 

161
152                                      Lina Perkins Wilder

of his memory theater were modeled on the Globe has not met with much 
favor; other attempts to link the theatrical imagery of the memory arts with 
actual theaters and actual plays have had limited success.20 Early modern 
memory theaters seem to have more in common with tableaux than they do 
with plays: images are arranged to be scanned by the inner (or outer) eye; they 
may be “animated,” but their movement does not develop into  narrative.21 
While  tableaux, dumb shows, and images meant to shock the spectator do 
occur in early modern plays, they occur in the context of a larger process. It 
seems clear that early modern English plays and memory theaters share, at 
least to some extent, a visual appeal. But they do not share dramatic process; 
they do not share narrative. 
       Shakespeare’s memory theater, in contrast, places memory in a narra-
tive context or, more specifically, in the narrative context peculiar to the early 
modern English stage. Jill L. Levenson speculates that early modern English 
audiences and players would have had a much more dynamic concept of dra-
matic structure than the one we have now. Rehearsing (if one did rehearse) or 
performing a play in Shakespeare’s theater, she writes, 

       meant locating one’s character—second by second—on the fluid, 
       unlocalised stage, in relation to the other players, and without the 
       guidance of a director. . .  . [T]he  first  productions of Romeo and 
       Juliet—or any English Renaissance drama—were performances in 
       the  making: processes which integrated all parts of the dramatic 
       whole in view of a large, responsive audience.22

Like  Stern, Levenson  sees the stage as embracing the  uncertainty that 

“ memory theaters seek to avoid. Levenson invokes the very metaphor of 
 fluid[ity]”    that is  resisted by students of  the art  of  memory because of 
their fears of bodily disorder. “Ideals of powerful executive control,” Sutton 
writes, “sat well with local memory, for independent ordered items in their 
places were already passive, waiting for the active executive to hunt them 
out.”23 The early modern English theater, lacking even “the guidance of a 
director,” is a “hunt” of a very different sort, a hunt without an executive.24 

“ Shakespeare’s     performances  of    memory   reflect   and   invite   the 
 integrat[ion]”  of  structural elements on the part of  the players as well as 
the audience. Romeo’s extended memory of the apothecary gives audience, 
character, and actor time to perceive the parallels in Romeo’s actions. Work-
ing from individual parts rather than complete scripts, the actors playing (for 
example) Romeo, the apothecary, Friar Laurence, the Nurse, and the Cho-
rus might not recognize the implications of their lines until they heard each 
other speak, and, as Stern and Levenson point out, limited rehearsal time 
could mean that they heard each other’s lines for the first time in front of an 

162
                           Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”            153

audience.25 For each of the groups involved, the process of discovery outlined 
in Romeo’s performed remembering might have been entirely genuine. As I 
will demonstrate, that process of discovery moves from the identification of 
Friar Laurence with the apothecary to the more shadowy identification of the 
Nurse with both figures and the incorporation of Romeo’s “defiance” into the 
Chorus’s predetermined plot summary. 
       But  the performance of memory requires more than a drawing of struc-
tural lines through a series of events that everyone—player, character, audience 
member—witnesses at once. Romeo’s performance of memory evokes a scene 
that he alone saw—and this “he” is Romeo the character, not the actor playing 
Romeo. When Romeo remembers this absent scene, the theatrical commu-
nity described by Levenson dwindles to a single person, if he can be called 
a person. Audience participation in Romeo’s “experience” of Mantuan roads 
is limited  to what the  performance of memory can bring us. The memory 
emblems and the tableaux of memorable objects that William Engel finds in 
early modern plays invite the audience to participate in the play by remem-
bering its images. (Shakespeare does this occasionally: the dumb show that 
precedes the Mousetrap in Hamlet is one example.26) In Shakespeare’s mem-
ory theater, though, the audience and indeed the actors participate along with 
the characters only to a certain extent in the process of remembering. We see 
Romeo seeking poison, not the evocative interior of the apothecary’s shop; we 
see the aging Justice Shallow, not the (perhaps fictional) “lusty Shallow” of his 
past (3.2.15);27 we see Yorick’s skull, not the lips that Hamlet remembers kiss-
ing; we see Cleopatra’s suicidal “return” to Cydnus, not her first appearance 
there; we see Caliban cursing, not dreaming. The door in the wall remains, 
essentially, closed; we see only quick flashes of the space behind it. 

          II.   “I  Do Remember”: Memory  Theater in  Romeo and Juliet 
Two of Shakespeare’s clearest examples of memory theater occur in Romeo 
and Juliet—one of them the apothecary scene (5.1), the other the Nurse’s 
recollection of Juliet’s weaning (1.3). Both demonstrate many of the qualities 
that I  have described above: the disruption of dramatic action, the physi-
cal absence of otherwise vividly sensual remembered objects, the extended 
performance of memory, the element of discovery. Romeo and the Nurse 
create memory theater from objects that,  because they are in the past or 
because they are outside the capabilities of an only intermittently spectacu-
lar theater, are not visible to the  audience: the interior of a shop with  the 
dusty remains of an inventory and desiccated fish hanging in the window, 
a shaking dovehouse, a child fussing over the taste of a nipple daubed with 
wormwood. Romeo’s and the Nurse’s recollections draw on the iconography 
of the  memory arts. Romeo in  particular  seems to have internalized the 
principles that would lend order to his stored impressions. (Romeo describes 

163
154                                      Lina Perkins Wilder

the apothecary’s shop as a place “which late I noted”; a  habit of “noting” 
was recommended as a way to create memory loci and to practice memo-
rization.28 ) But the process of recollection, it  seems, disrupts any system 
imposed during storage. 
       The Nurse’s speech at 1.3.20–44 anticipates, through the reactions of 
her onstage listeners, the impatience and embarrassment with which critics 
would greet Romeo’s performed remembering in the apothecary scene. More 
importantly, it  introduces the  device of performed remembering into  the 
play as the Nurse famously recounts the earthquake of Lammas Eve eleven 
years earlier and Juliet’s weaning. The images animated by her performance 
of memory draw her own interest, but as they multiply, they test the patience 
of her auditors: Lady Capulet’s “Enough of this” (l. 49)  is quickly followed 
by Juliet’s “stint thou” (l. 58).29 Like the earthquake, the shaking dovehouse, 
the pratfall, and the husband’s bawdy joke that punctuate the Nurse’s perfor-
mance of memory, the furniture of the apothecary’s shop is in accord with 
the objects recommended by memory artists: the “merye, cruell, iniurious, 
merueylous, excellently fayre, or exceedinglye foule thynges” which William 
Fulwood claims “do chaunge and moue the senses, and . . . styrre vppe the 
Memorye.”30 Romeo remembers an apothecary who is himself grotesque and 
who is surrounded by grotesque objects: a man “[i]n tatter’d weeds, with over-
whelming brows, / Culling of simples,” who has been “worn . . . to the bones,” 
and whose shop is filled with decayed reminders of death: the stuffed car-

“ casses of alligator and tortoise, “ill-shap’d fishes,” and stores that have grown 
 musty” and “old.” But although they resemble objects placed to stimulate the 
memory, the sparseness and disorganization of the apothecary’s wares sug-
gest a more haphazard version of memory than the one usually advocated by 
memory artists. 
       The  seemingly arbitrary dilation  on  the  apothecary’s shop, which is 
Shakespeare’s innovation,31 underlines the role in this scene of the memory 
arts, in which apothecaries have a long history. The apothecary’s shop, first 
of all, recalls the imagined cities filled with  shops arranged in alphabetical 
order by means of which some memory artists memorized words and phrases. 
Johannes Romberch, for example, provides an engraving in which alphabet-
ized shops distinguished by simple images—a man dispatching a steer in 
the Bovicida, books in the window of the Bibliopola—provide a mental path 
that the memory artist could follow  in order to collect remembered objects 
left in  each place.32 A few memory artists include apothecarius and related 
words in their lists of alphabetized shops and professions.33 Further and more 
significantly, the word apothecary is both etymologically and metaphorically 
related to the organization  of memory. As Carruthers  notes, “storehouse,” 
usually rendered in Latin as thesaurus or arca, is one of the conventional meta-
phors for memory. Apotheca also “means ‘storehouse,’ originally for wine, but 

164
                           Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”            155

extended . . . to mean something like a ‘shop,’ a store full of precious things 
laid away in order, any of which the apothecarius can bring forth immediately 
in response to a request, and indeed, bring forth a host of related things too.”34 
Carruthers then cites the memory treatise by Hugh of St. Victor: 

       This  ark [arca, memory repository] is like to an apothecary’s shop, 
       filled   with  a variety of  all delights.  You will  seek nothing in  it 
       which  you will  not find,  and when you find  one thing,  you will 
       see many more disclosed to you. Here are bountifully contained 
       the universal works of our salvation . . . [and] the condition of the 
       universal Church. Here the narrative of historical events is woven 
       together, here the mysteries of the sacraments are found, here are 
       laid out the successive stages of responses, judgments, meditations, 
       contemplations, of good works, virtues, and rewards.35

       The differences between the apothecary’s shop in Romeo and Juliet and 
the one described by Hugh are as striking as the similarities. Compared to 
Hugh’s apothecary shop, Romeo’s is disorganized and poorly stocked, and 
its owner’s “penury” is predictive of his willingness to sell Romeo poison; but 
this shop also reflects the qualities of Romeo’s memory. The items in the shop 
in Mantua are not “laid away in order,” but “scatter’d.” The apothecary is not 
present to “bring forth  immediately” the  items Romeo wishes to purchase 
(or remember) and to  produce associated items from neighboring shelves 
but must be summoned from his shop (“What  ho!  Apothecary!” [5.1.57]). 
Under normal circumstances the objects on the shelves of an apothecary’s 
shop, like those carried by a modern drugstore, existed as much to distract the 
patron into adding a few unnecessary items to his shopping bag as to heal his 
ailments: as Hugh says, “when you find one thing, you will see many more 
disclosed to you.” This is not the case in Romeo’s apothecary shop. Romeo’s 
memory does not contain the easily reached copia of texts or objects with 
which memory artists crammed their minds. The shop is not “full of precious 
things”; in fact, as Romeo says, the apothecary’s inventory has reached des-
perately low levels, and there are only a few images set out in his apotheca. 
       The shop’s low inventory and the  difficulty  with  which Romeo gains 
access to what it does contain mirror the challenge of translating Romeo’s 
past experience into his present situation. The performance of memory is an 
act of self-conscious negotiation between present and past, a “repetition with 
revision” (as Joseph Roach calls both memory and performance) that gives 
the rememberer an increasingly precise orientation in the dramatic present.36 
Remembering the shop’s contents brings Romeo physically into the scene as 
he moves from a vague sense that the apothecary lives “hereabouts” (l. 38) to 
the near certainty that “this should be the house” (l. 55): 

165
156                                      Lina Perkins Wilder

       Well,  Juliet, I will  lie with  thee tonight. 
       Let’s see for means. O mischief thou art swift 
       To enter in the thoughts of desperate men. 
       I  do remember an apothecary 
       And  hereabouts a dwells—which late I noted 
       In  tatter’d weeds, with overwhelming brows, 
       Culling  of simples. . . . 

       ‘ Noting this penury, to myself I said, 
        And if  a man did need a poison now, 
       Whose sale is present death in Mantua, 
       Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him’. 
       O,  this same thought did but forerun my need, 
       And  this same needy man must sell it me. 
       As I  remember, this should be the house. 
                                                                                (ll.  34–40, 49–55) 

Beginning awkwardly, with short sentences and numerous self-interruptions, 
Romeo traces the process of recollection from the initial and silent thought 
of poison back toward the remembered quip that produced it (ll. 50–52), the 
thought that “did but forerun my need.” His memory of the apothecary finds 
Romeo in the same physical location in which he formed a memory of the 
shop’s contents and their possible use, but his changing circumstances make 
it seem strange: “this should be the house,” he says. (Memory by places, it 
seems, is not always as effective as memory artists would have us believe.37) 
It is important that  the shop, often represented in performance by a door in 
the back wall, be left to  Romeo’s memory and the audience’s imagination. 
Romeo does not actually enter the apothecary’s shop; instead, he calls the 
apothecary to come forth. Since the shop is closed, shut behind a door that 
leads to the dust and timber backstage, negotiations between Romeo’s past 
and present perceptions of the shop take place entirely in words, and the 
perspectives involved are exclusively Romeo’s. The apothecary’s shop, like 
a psychic prop-room, exists only in the backstage of Romeo’s mind and is 
brought forward only through his performance of memory. 
       As the scene continues, Romeo finds himself increasingly and involun-
tarily caught up in the associative logic of recollection. The backward trail of 
Romeo’s memory does not end with his unstaged walk through the streets 
of Mantua when he first arrived there, nor do his thoughts of poison begin 
there. The apothecary scene shows Romeo to be more observant than his 

“ previous behavior gives us reason to suspect and suggests that his habit of 
 noting” began before he encountered the apothecary shop. Romeo’s descrip-
tion of the apothecary—a poor man “[i]n tatter’d weeds, with overwhelming 
brows, / Culling of  simples”—becomes a recollection of another character’s 

166
                           Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”            157

first appearance, that of Friar Laurence. The first time we see Romeo and the 
friar together, Friar Laurence is engaged in the activity by which Romeo later 
identifies the apothecary: 

       Within   the infant rind  of this weak flower 
       Poison hath residence, and medicine power: 
       For this,  being smelt, with that part cheers each part; 
       Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart. 
                                                                                           (2.3.19–22) 

The apothecary, as Dominick  Grace convincingly  argues, is a double for 
Friar Laurence.38 Early in the play, Romeo sees Friar Laurence as he is per-
forming the same task of culling simples that he remembers the apothecary 
performing.39 Friar  Laurence himself  associates plant-cutting  with   the 
manufacture of poisons. Although he distinguishes “precious-juiced flow-
ers” from “baleful weeds” early in the speech (l.4), medicinal and harmful 
qualities grow  less distinguishable as the speech proceeds. Since Romeo 
enters just before  Friar  Laurence identifies  the  plant  as half-medicine, 
half-poison,40 he would hear most clearly not Friar Laurence’s moralizing 
but his decidedly practical conclusion, in which the function of the plant is 
made explicit. The connection that Romeo makes in the apothecary scene 
between a man “Culling of  simples” and that man’s ability to provide him 
with poison may deliberately recall and certainly echoes his first scene with 
Friar Laurence. 
       Romeo’s echo of Friar Laurence’s words rebelliously sweeps away all the 
friar’s careful distinctions. When playing apothecary, Friar Laurence concocts 
the “borrow’d likeness of shrunk death” (4.1.104, emphasis added); Romeo, 
though he addresses his vial as “cordial and not poison” (5.1.85), wants the 
real thing. His attempts at renaming—calling his gold “poison” and his poi-
son “cordial”—reflect the mind of a man schooled under Friar Laurence and 
familiar with his multiple  glosses, but the renamings do not conceal his un-
Laurentian purpose. The swiftness of the death Romeo demands—he wants 
to die “[a]s violently as hasty powder fir’d / Doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s 
womb” (ll. 64–65)41—justifies the friar’s misgivings three acts earlier: 

       These violent delights have violent ends 
       And  in their  triumph die, like fire  and powder, 
       Which  as they kiss consume. . . . 
                                                                                             (2.6.9–11) 

Friar Laurence picks up the gunpowder metaphor again in 3.3 after Romeo’s 
banishment. “Thy wit,” he says, 

167
158                                      Lina Perkins Wilder

       Like  powder in a skilless soldier’s flask 
       Is set afire by thine own ignorance, 
       And  thou dismember’d with thine own defence. 
                                                                                (3.3.129, 131–133) 

As T. J. B.  Spencer writes, “What the Friar  had prophesied as the conse-
quence of [Romeo’s] impetuous love, and his  equally impetuous despair, 
Romeo himself now asks for the poison to bring about.”42 
       Although  Romeo could  not be aware of the irony  that he has, in ef-
fect, been “set afire by [his] own ignorance” that Juliet is not dead, he does, I 
think, recognize how drastically he has departed from Friar Laurence’s ad-
vice. Checked in his rush toward suicide by the apothecary’s fear of Mantuan 
law, Romeo finds himself repeating the past in a more subdued tone: 

       Art  thou  so bare and full of wretchedness, 
       And  fear’st to die? Famine is in thy cheeks, 
       Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes, 
       Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back. 
       The  world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law; 
       The  world affords no law to make thee rich; 
       Then  be not poor, but break it, and take this.             (5.1.68–74) 

Romeo’s world-weariness here recalls Mercutio’s disillusioned  voice, the 
voice that tells  the lovesick Romeo to “[p]rick   love for  pricking”  (1.4.28) 
rather than fall  prey to  romantic self-destruction.  And  Romeo’s phrasing 

( echoes, once again, Friar Laurence. Perhaps half-hearing his own allusion 
 5.1.64–65) to  the  gunpowder of  the “skilless  soldier” (3.3.131), Romeo 
returns (at 5.1.72–73) to the Friar’s advice in 3.3: 

       What,  rouse thee, man. Thy Juliet is alive, 
       For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead. 
       There art  thou happy. . . . 
       The  law that threaten’d death becomes thy friend 
       And  turns it to  exile. There art thou        ( happy. 
                                                                          3.3.135–137, 139–140) 

Friar Laurence, the play’s earlier apothecary figure, stopped Romeo from 
committing suicide on more than one occasion. Romeo’s determination not 
to let the apothecary himself deter him from his purpose thus requires him 
to negotiate not only with the man present before him but with his memory 
of Friar Laurence’s advice. But when Romeo finds himself in the position of 

168
                           Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”            159

negotiator, he takes on Friar Laurence’s role and reiterates the friar’s words. 
Romeo says, quietly, “The world is not thy friend.” The word friend as well 
as the rhythm of Romeo’s line recall the friar’s concluding argument: “The 
law . .  . becomes thy friend /  And  turns  [death] to  exile.” When  Romeo 
recognizes this perhaps unconscious echo of Friar Laurence’s diction and his 
sententious iambs, he turns and revises his own words. “The world is not 
thy friend,”  he says aloud and then, half to himself, “nor  the world’s law.” 
The deliberate nature of Romeo’s rejection of Friar Laurence is underlined 
by his departure from the metrical inevitability that  marks Friar Laurence’s 
advice: the trochee at the end of the line invites the actor playing Romeo to 
slow down, to emphasize the line’s final words. 
       But  before Romeo finds himself echoing Friar Laurence’s advice, he also 
seems unconsciously to be echoing the Nurse’s vivid and disorganized recol-
lection of Juliet’s weaning.43 The Nurse’s memory, like Romeo’s, toys with and 
discards the imagery of the memory arts. As Carruthers and Stephen Green-
blatt remind us, dovehouses are a potent image for memory theorists, and one 
with somewhat equivocal implications.44 “Plato,” Greenblatt writes, 

       evidently  felt  obliged to  supplement his  primary  image of  the 
       wax  in  order to  convey what that  image conspicuously misses: 
       the  sense that memories often seem alive, fluttering, and elusive. 
       The  aviary metaphor . . . eschews any notion of systematicity, the 
       sense . . . that memory is like a treasure-house or strongbox with 
       distinct  compartments where one can look for particular objects. 
       In  the aviary, one must grope after memories that seem anxiously 
       determined to fly  out of one’s grasp.45 

The ordered nesting-places in which the Capulet doves rest are upset by the 
very event that anchors the Nurse’s memory: the earthquake. Greenblatt’s 
suggestion that avian memories are less systematic than memories inscribed 
in wax applies here, but the remnants of method that  he finds in  the avi-
ary also lose their methodic  character. The earthquake not  only disturbs 
the evocative rows of doves in their “pigeon-holes,” 46 but causes the Nurse 
to move away from  the  dovehouse: “Shake! quoth the dovehouse. ’Twas 
no need, I trow, /  To bid me trudge.” The  Nurse recalls the upheaval that 
troubles the orderly  pigeonholes, relishing the  memory of  the trembling 
dovehouse and (one suspects) the squawking and squabbling doves inside it, 
whose peaceful cooing contemplation is interrupted by the shaking of the 
earth.47 
       In  its partial  rejection of the masculine and scholarly habits of the art 
of memory, Romeo’s memory theater is in some sense a return to his “mother 
tongue,” to the distrusted garrulity of a plebeian, uneducated nursemaid who 

169
160                                      Lina Perkins Wilder

is also a voice for random reminiscence.48 The place where the Nurse situates 
her recollection of Juliet’s weaning is as significant as the apothecary’s shop 
and for largely the same reasons: it is both an evocation of memory systems 
and a violation of their  principles. Weaning by wormwood, like Friar Lau-
rence’s gathering of simples, mimics an apothecary’s activities. But both the 
history of the apothecary’s profession and the order in which the characters 
appear in Romeo and Juliet suggest that the formulation should be reversed: 
the apothecary, rather than being a model for the Nurse, is himself modeled 
on her domestic example. As Wendy Wall points out, in the sixteenth century 
the medical profession and the profession of apothecary were both relatively 
new phenomena. Most people still relied on “clergy, wise women, and most 
commonly the housewife” for medical advice and treatment. Wall quotes Juan 
Luis Vives’s The Instruction of a Christen Woman: 

       Because the business and charge within the house lyeth upon the 
       woman’s hand, I wolde she shuld knowe medycines and salves for 
       suche diseases as bee common, and reigne almost daily: and have 
       those medicines ever prepared redy in some closette wherewith  
       she  maie  helpe hir   housebande, hir  littell   children,   and  hir 
       householde meny [servants], whan any nedeth, that shee nede not 
       ofte to sende for the phisicion, or bye thynges of the potycaries.49

In Vives’s formulation, physicians and apothecaries are to be called in only 
when home remedies fail. Housewives’ remedies were not always pleasant. 
The kitchen  was, in an age before refrigeration, also a surgery: “Health,” 
Wall writes,  “smacked of licensed bloodshed.”50 The Nurse’s breast as the 
source of food is replaced by a medicine that apes the working of poison. 
She, like Friar Laurence, gives Juliet what is and is not a poison, hoping to 
free her at this early stage from dependence on another person through a 
minor loss, a mimicked death. 
       The  apothecary has been present throughout Romeo and Juliet in his 
wares (wormwood, simples, cordial, poison) and in the persons of the Nurse 
and Friar Laurence. He is as much a part of a recognizably domestic sphere 
as he is an alien element. Romeo’s performance of memory, however strange 
it may seem to him, leads him homeward, toward the strangely familiar, the 
Heimlich, toward Juliet, whose voice is excluded from the apothecary scene. 
In that scene Romeo approaches her but does not reach her, turned aside to-
ward the “means” to reach her (a role that has been filled in the course of the 
play by Friar Laurence and by the Nurse, as well as by the poison he is now 
seeking) instead of toward their end. Rather than seeing Juliet’s face, Romeo 
sees “old cakes of roses,” faded emblems of female beauty scattered on a poor 
apothecary’s shelves. 

170
                           Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”            161

       The sense of the play’s past, implied and staged through the  perfor-
mance of memory, is never complete. It  is restricted not  only by  the ab-
sence of the remembered object (always absent or it would not have to be 
remembered) but also by the  rememberer’s limited  experience. “There is 
nothing in  the intellect that  was not first in  the senses,” as memory artists 
often remarked.51 Romeo cannot remember scenes that he did not witness, 
cannot recognize structural connections between events that he does not 
understand and over which he has no control. The irony in his defiance of 
the stars (5.1.24) is lost on him, since he did not  hear the Chorus predict 
that the “star-cross’d lovers” (1.Pro.6) would follow the course of action that 
he now undertakes as if it were his own idea. The sense of structure gener-
ated by performed remembering is always, often tragically, defined by the 
rememberer’s experience and perspective. Performed remembering can cre-
ate new things, new connections, but it occasionally ignores (literally, does 
not know) old ones. 

                                             III.   Conclusion 
In Shakespeare’s memory theater remembered objects are not always visible, 
nor are the mechanics of memory. This is true  not only  of the mechanics 
of other people’s memories but also of the mechanics of one’s own. Romeo’s 
astonishment at the working of his memory (“O mischief thou art swift”) is 
a more sinister counterpart to the Nurse’s satisfaction at the way her memory 
works separately from herself (“Nay I do bear a brain”). Reminiscent of the 
recipes for salves, pills, and “gargarismes” (solutions for gargling) that were 
attached to treatises on the art of memory are the pharmacological objects 
remembered by the characters in Romeo and Juliet: the Nurse’s wormwood, 
the friar’s simples, the apothecary’s potions. These objects represent a series 
of attempts to change or to manipulate the body through medicinal means 
that accompany and sometimes coincide with  manipulations of  the  plot. 
Though involved  in  the language of physical exchange, the recollections 
of these objects come to emphasize the barriers as much as the continuity 
between the embodied experience of individuals. The poison around which 
Romeo’s performance of memory develops is gone when Juliet tries to follow 
Romeo; he has “[d]runk  all”  (5.3.163). Because Juliet’s sleeping potion—
among the play’s most significant medicinal interventions—is missing from 
Romeo’s experience, all the detail in his recollection of the apothecary’s shop 
cannot lead him to discover it. 
       The visual precision with  which the objects in  Shakespeare’s memory 
theater are recalled suggests a desire to manifest the inaccessible—the past, 
the internal, the unstaged. The emphasis on the visual points to a separate 
mode of representation which transcends and embraces the physical limits of 
the early modern English stage. As Julie Stone Peters argues: 

171
162                                      Lina Perkins Wilder



       ( As the stage poet says in Gabriel Chappuis’s The Celestial Worlds 
       “1583), “the thing  represented live” in the  theatre is represented 
         exactly as it was done.” Because of its connection to the worldly 
       icon,  theatre was seen (as it often still  is) as a more immediate 
       form  of representation than the purely verbal arts of the page. . . .  
       Identical  with  its  correlate phenomenon in the world, the  stage 
       icon  seemed not to require of  the spectator the same efforts of 
       translation required of the reader or mere listener.52

Like Erasmus of Rotterdam, who explains that Camillo’s memory theater is 
so called “because it can be seen by the eyes of the body,” Peters argues that 
the early modern theater was primarily a visual environment, marked by a 
direct appeal to the “spectator.” This view is not universally accepted: Cyn-
thia Marshall, for example, has objected strongly to “the reliance on specular 
response that guides much current dramatic criticism”; others emphasize the 
rhetorical aspect of playacting, which also requires an audience more aurally 
than visually attuned.53 What we find in  Shakespeare’s memory theater is 
neither the one nor the other;  instead, it is a crossing of these two means 
of apprehension, an aural landscape coded in a visual language. By appeal-
ing to  the sense of sight and then  refusing to  satisfy it, the  performance 
of memory  produces an atmosphere of  unfulfilled   desire. Shakespeare’s 
memory theater, while  placing memory  in  a narrative context,  also uses 
memory to break the frame  of that  narrative, to gesture toward what  the 
play does not show: Romeo’s past and, later and more tantalizingly, in plays 
that space does not allow me to discuss here, Shallow’s, Falstaff ’s, Hamlet’s, 
Antony’s, Cleopatra’s, Miranda’s, Caliban’s past, the space and time outside 
the boundaries of the  “two  hours’ traffic  of  our stage” (1.Pro.12), even a 
sense of inwardness. By evoking an extradramatic past, the performance of 
memory in Shakespeare’s plays intimates that the rememberer’s existence is 
not limited to the immediate physical present of the stage, and thus that he 
or she is to some degree separable from the play. 
       But  Shakespeare’s memory theater has to do with more than the vexed 
question of character. Recent critics have demonstrated in a variety of ways 
how deeply Shakespeare’s art is implicated in a past (personal, cultural, or 
material) outside the action of particular plays.54 I am suggesting that Shake-
speare’s concern with the past is also dramaturgical. It is no accident that 
scenes of performed remembering in Shakespeare’s plays are often associated 
with excess: the rhetorical trope of dilatio, a departure from the plot. From 
Seneca and his Elizabethan imitators, Shakespeare learned that a past evoked 
but unstaged can enrich and motivate present staged action. The excessive 
intrusion of the past in Shakespeare’s memory theater lays the groundwork 
for the romances and the mature tragedies, particularly Othello, Macbeth, and 

172
                              Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”                      163

King  Lear, all  of which   have to  do with   perturbed  or  mutilated   recollection. 
Ultimately   this  dramaturgical   strategy  leads toward  a theater  that  is a cross-
roads of the  physical present  and an absent, immaterial,   but  inescapable past. 

                                                         Notes


( I        would  like to thank  Lawrence Manley, Annabel Patterson, and the readers 
 anonymous and otherwise) at Shakespeare Quarterly for reading and rereading drafts 
of this essay. Earlier versions were presented at the 2002 annual conferences of the 
Shakespeare Association of America and the  Group  for Early  Modern  Cultural 
Studies. 
         1. Quotations from  Romeo and Juliet here follow Brian Gibbons’s edition for 
the Arden Shakespeare (London: Methuen, 1980). 
         2.  This  passage from an anonymous eighteenth-century critic  presents the 
typical response to the apothecary scene: “Shakespeare . . . makes [Romeo] in the 
midst of  his affliction   for the death of  his wife,  and while  the horrible  design of 
killing  himself  was forming  in  his mind,  give a ludicrous detail  of the  miserable 
furniture  of  a poor apothecary’s shop; a description which,  however beautiful, is 
here ill-timed  and totally  inconsistent with the  condition and circumstance of the 
speaker” (“An Account of  the Novel and Play of  Romeo and Juliet” [1764], quoted 
here from Shakespeare: The Critical Heritage, Brian Vickers, ed., 6 vols. [London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974–1981], 4:538–539). For defenses of the apothecary 
scene, see Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Shakespearean Criticism, ed. Thomas Middleton 
Raysor, 2 vols.  (London:  Dent;   New  York:  Dutton  [1961–1962]), 1:11; Harley 
Granville-Barker,  Prefaces to Shakespeare, 5 vols. (London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 
Ltd.,  1927–1947), 2:56; G.  Wilson  Knight,  Shakespeare’s Dramatic Challenge: On 
the Rise of Shakespeare’s Tragic Heroes (London: Croom Helm, 1977), 42; Clifford 
Leech, “The  Moral  Tragedy  of Romeo and Juliet” in English Renaissance Drama: 

( Essays in Honor of Madeleine Doran and Mark Eccles, Standish Henning et al., eds. 
 Carbondale: Southern Illinois   University  Press, 1976), rpt.  in  Critical Essays on 
Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, Joseph A. Porter, ed. (New York:  G.  K.  Hall, 
(1997), 7–22, esp. 14–15; and James H. Seward, Tragic Vision in Romeo and Juliet 
 Washington, DC:  Consortium Press, 1973), 183. For a recent extended reading of 
the apothecary scene, including a summary of its negative reception, see Dominick 
Grace, “Romeo and the  Apothecary,” Early Theatre: A Journal Associated with the 
Records of Early English Drama 1 (1998): 27–38, esp. 29. 
         3. On  the  role of  time in  Romeo and Juliet, see E. Pearlman, “Shakespeare 
at  Work:  Romeo and Juliet,”  English Literary  Renaissance 24 (1994): 315–342; 
Lloyd  Davids, “‘Death-Marked   Love’: Desire and Presence in Romeo and Juliet,” 
Shakespeare Survey 49 (1996): 57–67; Thomas Pughe, “‘What an Unkind Hour’: 
Time  in  Romeo and Juliet,” Q/W/E/R/T/Y:    Arts,  Littératures &  Civilisations  du 
Monde Anglophone 2 (1992): 5–15; David Lucking, “Uncomfortable Time in Romeo 
and Juliet,” English Studies 82.2 (2001): 115–126; Jill L. Levenson, Shakespeare in 
Performance: Romeo and Juliet (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1987), 16 
and passim; and James Calderwood, Shakespearean Metadrama: The Argument of the 
Play in Titus Andronicus,  Love’s Labour’s Lost, Romeo and Juliet, A Midsummer 
Night’s Dream, and Richard II (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota  Press, 1971), 
85–119. 

173
164                                           Lina Perkins Wilder

           4. Tiffany  Stern, Rehearsal from Shakespeare to Sheridan (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 2000), 13–14. 
           5. Stern, 64, 98. 
           6.  See “On   Memory  and  Recollection”  in  Aristotle: On  the Soul, Parva 
Naturalia,  On  Breath, ed.  and  trans.  W.  S.  Hett   (Cambridge,  MA:   Harvard 
University Press, 1957), 288–313, esp. 311, 313. On  Aristotle   and memory,  see 
David Farrell  Krell,  Of Memory, Reminiscence, and Writing (Bloomington: Indiana 

( University Press, 1990), 13–50; and Janet Coleman, Ancient and Medieval Memories 
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 15–38. 
           7. See, for example, Helkiah Crooke: “Finally, all these [Ideas or Notions] are 
receyued by the Memory, which as a faithful Recorder or Maister of the Rolles doth 
preserue, store vp and dispose in due order all the forenamed Notions or abstracted 
formes” (Mikrokosmographia, or, A Description of the Whole Body of Man [London, 
1615], 502, emphasis added). See also Frances A. Yates, The Art of Memory (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966), 2, 306, and passim; Lina Bolzoni, The Gallery of 
Memory: Literary and Iconographic Models in the Age of the Printing Press, trans. Jeremy 
Parzen (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2001), xxii, 155; Mary J. Carruthers, 
The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990); Douwe Draaisma, Metaphors of Memory: A History of Ideas 
About the Mind, trans. Paul Vincent (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000); 
and Paolo Rossi, Logic and the Art of Memory: The Quest for a Universal Language, 
trans. Stephen Clucas (London: Athlone  Press, 2000). For discussions of theater 
and the visual imagery of  the art  of memory, see William  E.  Engel, “Mnemonic 
Criticism  and Renaissance Literature: A   Manifesto,”  Connotations: A Journal for 
Critical Debate 1 (1991): 12–33; Engel, Mapping Mortality: The Persistence of Memory 
and Melancholy in Early Modern England (Amherst:  University  of  Massachusetts 

( Press, 1995); and Engel, Death and Drama in Renaissance England: Shades of Memory 
 Oxford: Oxford  University Press, 2002). 
           8. John Sutton, “Body, Mind, and Order: Local  Memory and the Control of 
Mental Representations in Medieval and Renaissance Sciences of Self ” in 1543 and 
All That: Image and Word, Change and Continuity in the Proto-Scientific Revolution, 
Guy Freeland and Anthony Corones, eds. (Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 2000), 117–150, esp. 117–121, 123, 127–128, 142n. 
           9. See Katharine  Park,  “The  Organic  Soul”  in  The Cambridge History of 
Renaissance Philosophy, Charles B. Schmitt et al., eds. (Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press, 1988), 464–484; G. W. Bruyn, “The Seat of the Soul” in Historical 
Aspects of the Neurosciences, F. Clifford Rose and W. F. Bynum, eds. (New York: Raven 
Press, 1982), 55–81; and Walter Pagel, “Medieval and Renaissance Contributions to 
Knowledge of the Brain  and Its Functions”  in History and Philosophy of Knowledge 
of the Brain and its  Functions, F.N.L.  Poynter, ed. (Oxford:   Blackwell Scientific 
Publications, 1958), 95–114. 
         10. Sutton,  “Body, Mind,   and Order,”  121–130, esp. 129. See also Sutton, 
Philosophy and Memory Traces: Descartes to Connectionism (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998). 
         11. “To sleepe hosed and shued especially with foule sockes, doth hinder the 
Memorie, because of the ref lection of ye vapours: feebleth the sight, and causeth 

[ the bodie to  waxe hot  and  burne”  (William    Fulwood,  The Castel of  Memorie 
 London, 1573], sig. D2v). Fulwood’s treatise, first printed in  1562, is a translation 

174
                              Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”                      165

of Guglielmo Gratarolo’s De Memoria Reparanda, Avgenda, Servandaqve Liber vnus. 
De Locali vel Artificiosa Memoria Liber alter (Rome, 1555). 
         12. I  borrow the phrase “localist model” from  Sutton; see “Body, Mind,  and 
Order,” passim. 
         13.  Johannes Romberch, Congestoriu[m] Artificiose Memorie (Venice, 1520), 
sig. B7r. 

( 14.       See Peter of Ravenna, Foenix D[omi]ni Petri Rauenatis Memoriae Magistris 
 Venice, 1491), sig. B3r–v. 
         15.  John Willis,   Mnemonica; or, the Art of Memory, Drained out of the pure 
Fountains of Art &  Nature . . . (London,  1661 [f irst published in  Latin  in  1618]), 
sigs. E2v–E3r, E4v. Bolzoni draws an analogy between acting and the construction 
of memory images (173). See also Engel, Death and Drama, 52–53. 
         16. See Yates, 342–367. Yates reproduces both Willis’s and Fludd’s diagrams 
in her chapter on Fludd. 
         17. Bolzoni, 241. 
         18. Erasmus of Rotterdam, Opus epistolarum, ed. P. S. Allen (Oxford: Oxford 
University  Press, 1941),  10:29–30,  quoted here  from   Bolzoni,   159 (emphasis 
added). 
         19. Letter from Viglius Zuichemus to Erasmus, quoted here from Bolzoni, 159.
         20. See Engel, Death and Drama; Nigel Alexander, “Hamlet  and the Art  of 
Memory,” Notes & Queries 213 (1968): 137–139; Bernard Richards, “Hamlet  and 
the Theatre  of Memory,”  N&Q   233 (1981): 53; Adam  Max  Cohen, “Hamlet   as 
Emblem: The  Ars Memoria and the Culture  of the Play,” Journal of Early Modern 
Cultural Studies 3.1 (2003): 77–112. 
         21. See Bolzoni, 173. 
         22. Levenson, 14–15. 
         23. Sutton, “Body, Mind,  and Order,” 125. 
         24.  On  the lack  of dramatis  personae and other markers in  early modern 
playtexts and performances, see, Margreta de Grazia and Peter Stallybrass, “The 
Materiality  of the Shakespearean Text,” Shakespeare Quarterly 44 (1993): 255–283, 
esp. 267. 
         25. Stern, 46–123, esp. 52–79; and Levenson, 14. 
         26. See Engel, Death and Drama, 37–45. 
         27. Quotations  from   The  Second Part of  King   Henry  IV   follow   A.   R. 
Humphreys’s edition for the Arden Shakespeare (London: Methuen, 1966). 
         28.  Fulwood  explains that  “[t]he  right   way to  haue artifical   Memorie,  is 
the collocation  &   diligent  obseruation of  thinges”  (sig. F8r). Willis   emphasizes 
the importance of  “noting”: “Natural   Memory  is a faculty which  every man hath 
naturally to apprehend and retain note-worthy things” (sig. K4r); Willis also advises 
students that, among other disciplines (such as eating raisins for breakfast), “[t]he 
mind must be constantly exercised in learning some sentences by heart (yea though 
there be no  need) that  the faculty  of  remembring may be  quickned by  use and 
practice” (sig. L4r). 
         29. On Juliet’s and Lady Capulet’s attempts to interrupt the Nurse, see Stern, 
89–90. 

( 30.        Fulwood,  sig.  G4r. This  principle,  drawn  from  classical Latin  sources 
 Cicero, Quintilian,  the anonymous Ad Herennium), recurs in most treatises on the 
memory arts. See Engel, Death and Drama, 53; and Yates, 10. 

175
166                                           Lina Perkins Wilder

         31.  Jill  Levenson  points  out  that  Bandello’s  novel  does not  contain  an 
apothecary at all; the role is added in later versions of the story to explain Romeo’s 
acquisition of  poison (“Romeo and Juliet Before Shakespeare,” Studies in Philology 
81 [1984]:  325–347, esp. 340–341). Arthur   Brooke’s Romeus and Juliet includes 
the apothecary and much of the language from the  scene but excludes the role of 
memory. Romeus’s search for an apothecary’s shop takes place in real time and space 
rather than in his memory; see Arthur Brooke, Brooke’s ‘Romeus and Juliet’, being the 
original of Shakespeare’s ‘Romeo and Juliet’, ed. J. J. Munro (New York: Duffield and 
Co.; London: Chatto and Windus,  1908), ll. 2563–2567. See also Grace, 28. 
         32. Romberch, sig. D4r. Yates points out that both Romberch and Giordano 
Bruno suggest shops as memory loci (112f [Pl. 5a], 250–251). 
         33. See Romberch, sigs. D6r, F6v–F7r; and the anonymous Ludus artificialis 
obliuionis (Leipzig, 1510), sig. B1r. 
         34. Carruthers, 45. 
         35. Hugh of St. Victor, “De arca Noe morali,” quoted here from Carruthers, 45. 
         36.  Joseph Roach,  Cities of  the Dead: Circum-Atlantic  Performance (New 
York:  Columbia  University   Press, 1996),  3–4,  29–30;  the  term  derives  from 
Margaret  Thomson Drewal’s  discussion of  parody in  Yoruba Ritual:  Performers, 

“ Play, Agency (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992), 4–5. See also Roach, 
 Reconstructing  Theatre/History,”  Theatre Topics 9 (1999): 3–10. My   thanks to 
Emily Hodgson Anderson for this  reference. 
         37. According  to Willis,   “particularly as to Places, their usefulness doth hence 
appear, that if a Traveller observe any remarkable thing in a cross way, or some noted 
place of his journey, returning the same way, he doth not onely remember the place, but 
calleth to mind what soever he had seen here, though at present removed. The same 
thing often happeneth in Repetition of Idea’s; for the mind as it were walking through 
the same Places . . . is much assisted in recalling Idea’s to mind there placed ” (sigs. 
A3v–A4r). 
         38. See Grace, 30, 31, 33, 35. 
         39.  Grace  also  notes  this   parallel:  “Now,   when  Romeo  describes  the 
apothecary, he recalls he first saw the man ‘Culling of simples’—that is, gathering 
herbs, just as Friar Laurence was doing when first we saw him” (35). 
         40. The  stage direction that places Romeo’s entrance immediately preceding 
line 19 comes from Q2 and is reprinted in the Folio. 
         41.  His   odd  word  choice—the  “cannon’s  womb”—may  also echo  Friar 
Laurence’s earthy womb-tomb at 2.3.5–6, although Romeo is not  present to hear 
that part of the speech. 
         42. T.J.B. Spencer, ed., The Penguin Shakespeare Romeo and Juliet (London: 
Penguin Books, 1967), 31–32. See also Grace, 28. 
         43. In  Brooke’s Romeus and Juliet, Romeo is present when the Nurse recalls 
Juliet’s childhood (ll. 651–662). 

( 44.         See Carruthers, 35–36;  and Stephen Greenblatt,  Hamlet in  Purgatory 
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001), 214–218. 
         45. Greenblatt, 214–215. 
         46. The  earliest use of the word pigeonhole in English in its modern sense is 
in the  eighteenth century, but the  concept is present from antiquity  onward.  See 
Carruthers, 36. 
         47. The association of the cella columbarum with other memory cellae may or 
may not be the reason that so many memory theorists recommend that their readers 

176
                              Toward a Shakespearean “Memory Theater”                      167

eat turtledove. Fulwood, for  example, departs from his source to mention the fact 
that “[i]t  is also sayde, that the flesh of a Turtle  Doue doth  encrease the wit” (sig. 
D5r). 
         48. See Wendy Wall, Staging Domesticity: Household Work and English Identity 
in Early Modern Drama (Cambridge and  New York: Cambridge  University Press, 
2002), 74. 
         49. Juan Luis Vives, A Fruteful and pleasant boke called the Instruction of Christen 
Woman (London, 1529), 108, quoted here from Wall, 164. 
         50. Wall,  195. 

“ 51.       Ludus artificialis obliuionis is one of the many treatises to repeat the phrase 
 Et nihil   est in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in  sensu” (sig. C6v). Park identifies this as 
a “commonplace” (470). 
         52.  Julie  Stone  Peters, Theatre of  the Book 1480–1880: Print,   Text, and 
Performance in Europe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 171–172. 
         53.  Cynthia  Marshall,   “Man  of  Steel  Done  Got  the  Blues: Melancholic 
Subversion of Presence in Antony and Cleopatra,” SQ 44 (1993): 385–408, esp. 397; 
see also Hélène Cixous, “Aller à la Mer,”  trans. Barbara Kerslake, Modern Drama 
27 (1984): 546–548, esp. 547 (cited  in Marshall,   397). On  theater and rhetoric, 
see Joseph Roach, The Player’s Passion: Studies in the Science of Acting (Newark: 
University of Delaware Press, 1985), 32; Leo Salingar, “Uses of  Rhetoric: Antony 
and Cleopatra,” Cahiers Élisabéthains 55 (1999): 17–26, esp. 18–19. On the use of 
the terms audience and spectators in early modern English theater, see Andrew Gurr, 
Playgoing in Shakespeare’s London (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), 
86–98. 
         54.  See, for  example, Greenblatt,  passim; Michael  Neill,   Issues of Death: 
Mortality and Identity in English Renaissance Tragedy (Oxford: Clarendon Press; New 
York: Oxford  University  Press, 1997); Ann Rosalind Jones and Peter Stallybrass, 
Renaissance Clothing and the Materials of Memory (Cambridge  and  New  York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000); and Katharine Eisaman Maus, Inwardness and 
Theater in the English Renaissance (Chicago and London: University of  Chicago 
Press, 1995). 

178
                            THOMAS       HONEGGER


       “Wouldst    thou   withdraw        love’s  faithful     vow?”: 
       The            ( Negotiation of Love in the Orchard     Scene 
                            Romeo    and    Juliet    Act  II   )



                                        1.  Introduction
Shakespeare’s dramatic dialogues have, for obvious reasons, been repeat-
edly the subject of historical pragmatic studies.1 Romeo and Juliet, however, 
may not strike one as the most obvious choice for historical dialogue analysis. 
Most critics have stressed the lyrical-poetic quality of its dialogues rather than 
their interactional finesse. Yet the one does not necessarily exclude the other, 
as I have shown (Honegger 2005) by means of a discussion of the sonnet- 
sequence that constitutes the very first verbal exchange between Romeo and 
Juliet (Oxford 1.4.206–223; Arden 1.5.92–109).2 The main focus of this 
article, then, is on the complexities involved in the negotiation of love in 
the ensuing orchard scene in the second act. These are compared with the 
corresponding passages in Shakespeare’s most immediate source, Arthur 
Brooke’s The Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Juliet (1562),3 contrasted with 
the conventions of traditional (courtly) wooing and set against the meta-
comments on courtly interaction as found in Count Baldassare Castiglione’s 
The Book of the Courtier (1528, English translation 1561).

                                        2. Preliminaries
Romeo and Juliet, who meet for the first time at the feast of the Capulet 
family, fall in love with each other at first sight. Their first exchange of 
words (Oxford 1.4.206–219; Arden 1.5.92–105) adapts the form of a joint 

Journal of Historical Pragmatics, Volume 7, Number 1 (2006): pp. 73–88. Copyright © 2006 
John Benjamin Publishing Company.

                                                  169

179
170                                       Thomas Honegger

sonnet and the two approach both a dramatic and poetic climax  with  the 
imminent completion of the sonnet. The final couplet, with its verbal paral-
lelisms (move, prayer) and the fact that the two adjacent lines spoken by the 
protagonists share the same rhyme, immediately precedes and foreshadows 
the harmonious physical union by means of a kiss.
       Romeo’s lonely Petrarchism, as evidenced before in his lines about love 
in general and Rosaline in particular (Oxford 1.1.167ff; Arden 1.1.169ff ), and 
also in his verses upon perceiving Juliet for the first time (Oxford 1.4.157–
166; Arden 1.5.43–52), is modified and shared by Juliet in their joint sonnet. 
Shakespeare, by showing Juliet as taking up Romeo’s metaphors of pilgrim-
age, has her observe one of Baldassare Castiglione’s recommendations for 
elegant courtly conversation, namely, “so the metaphors be well applyed, and 
especiallye yf they be answered, and he that maketh answere continue in the 
self same metaphor spoken by the other” (Cox 1994: 173). Moreover, the two 
lovers-to-be follow Castiglione’s advice of exploring each other’s feelings

       with   such sobermoode, and so warilye, that the  woordes maye 
       firste  attempt the minde, and so doubtfullye touch her entent and 
       will,  that they maye leave her a way and a certein issue to feine the 
       understandinge that those woordes conteine love: to the entent if 
       he finds anye daunger, he maye draw backe and make wise to have 
       spoken or written it  to an other ende (Cox 1994: 276).

Lastly, Juliet’s participation in  the composition of the  sonnet foreshadows 
her active role in the  developing relationship with  Romeo, which in  turn 
may be seen as mirroring the historical changing attitude towards woman 
who was “no longer merely a necessary vessel for procreation but an active 
sexual partner” (Neely 1985: 13). As will become clear, Juliet’s interactional 
patterns are going to be different from those of a typical Petrarchan heroine 
and she is the very opposite of a Petrarchan heroine in that she falls imme-
diately in love with Romeo.
       For  Romeo, Petrarchan language, formerly the expression of his amo-
rous frustration and isolation, has become the very instrument to conquer 
and win over the beloved lady.4 The sonnet, as a lyrical work of art, should 
end with the kiss. Yet the world of Verona is not all Petrarchan conceits, nor 
is the play a string of sonnets. Romeo’s “post-oscular” line acknowledges the 
fact that it is one thing to sonnetise about kissing, but another actually to do 
it. The imaginary curve that indicates the face-threatening potential peaks 
with the  kiss, which constitutes a possible point of interactional transition. 
The dangers inherent in a kiss, even if it  is prefaced by and embedded in 
Petrarchan language and regulated by social etiquette, are not to be underes-
timated. Already medieval theorists on love warned: “Li baisiers autre chose 

180
                          “Wouldst thou withdraw love’s faithful vow?”               171

atrait.”5 And neo-platonic  theory of  love is also ambiguous about kissing. 
Castiglione’s Peter Bembo voices the following warning: “For sins a kisse is a 
knitting together both of body and soule, it is to be feared, least the sensuall 
lover will be more inclined to the part of the bodye, then of the soule” (Cox 
1994: 354).6
       Romeo  and  Juliet could  be expected to  abandon their   pretensions 
towards witticisms after the first kiss and resume their conversation on a dif-
ferent, more intimate level. This is not the case. We must not forget that the 
metaphoric language of the sonnet has been playful and ambiguous, and a 
man would be naïve to think himself the object of love when a lady is so cour-
teous as to allow him to kiss her. In such a context, the (non-verbal or verbal) 
reaction immediately after the kiss is of crucial importance.7 Romeo forestalls 
misleading interpretations of his action by framing it with the comment “Thus 
from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged” (Oxford  1.4.220; Arden 1.5.106), 
continuing this way their conversation on the same metaphorical level. This 
is, interactionally speaking, rather a step backwards—even if it is “reculer pour 
mieux sauter”. Juliet seems to enjoy Romeo’s playful advances and, taking the 
cue from him, prompts him to  kiss her once more with her “Then have my 
lips the sin that they have took” (Oxford 1.4.221; Arden 1.5.107). It is only 
now, after the second kiss, that she seems to signal a readiness to abandon the 

“ pilgrim-and-saint metaphor, although she still retains a facetious tone in her 
 You kiss by th’book” (Oxford 1.4.223; Arden 1.5.109),8 which completes the 
first quatrain of a second sonnet. Yet the witty tone cannot hide the fact that 
the second kiss poses something of an interactional problem. The first kiss can 
be accounted for within the framework of Renaissance greeting habits. The 
second kiss, then, is “superfluous” and legitimised only by means of the two 
protagonist’s word-play. Unfortunately we are in a play and not in a Sidneyan 
sonnet sequence and the lovers’ second sonnet composition is interrupted by 
the nurse. Juliet is whisked away to see her mother, so that the audience is 
expertly guided back into the more prosaic world of drama where marriage is 
still largely dependent on parental consent. Romeo and Juliet, before the close 
of what modern editions have called Act I,  are to discover their respective 
identities, and what started with a kiss as tender dalliance turns for both into 
something far more serious and threatening than expected.

                                    3.  A  Declaration  of Love?
Anything  that comes after the sonnet sequence between the two lovers-to-
be at the end of the first  act must  look like  an anticlimax. The  following 
orchard scene, which replaces and condenses Arthur Brooke’s description of 
Romeus’s long-drawn suffering into one scene, may add to the organisation 
and development of the plot, yet it is, if one expects a “traditional” wooing 
sequence with reluctant and aloof lady and patiently suffering lover, oddly 

181
172                                       Thomas Honegger

disappointing. Yet the  scene’s “deficiencies” are, as will be  shown, more 
than compensated for by Shakespeare’s introduction of new interactional 
complexities and by making Juliet a much more active protagonist than her 
predecessor in Arthur Brooke’s Romeus and Juliet.
       The first  encounter between Romeo and Juliet and the orchard scene 
are separated by a sonnet spoken by the Chorus, which calls in a new era of 
mutual love, and the scene with Mercutio and Benvolio, that marks the return 
to less highly strung levels of language and interaction, providing a relaxation 
from the “high  style” of the sonnet dialogue. Romeo’s entrance, too, contin-
ues rather his former Petrarchan “luf-talkyng”9 than the inspired language of 
the sonnet dialogue. Wells (1998: 915) describes him as follows: “Wandering 
about in Capulet’s orchard trying to catch a glimpse of his new beloved, he 
runs through some of the standard lines in the Petrarchist’s repertoire, much 
as a musician might warm up with some arpeggios before an important per-
formance.” Indeed, the spontaneous yet poetic language of the first encounter 
gives way to the former monologic exploration  of Petrarchan imagery—at 
least as long as Romeo is not talking directly to Juliet. It is she who gets down 
to the reality of  love and the problems that such a liaison creates, whereas 
Romeo is still busy searching for new oxymorons and metaphors. Her Saus- 
surean analysis (“avant la letter,” though) of the relationship between signifier 
and signified (Oxford  2.1.81–92; Arden 2.1.38–48) ends with  her impas-
sioned plea: “Romeo, doff thy name, / And for thy  name, which is no part 
of thee, / Take all myself ” (Oxford 2.1.90–92; Arden 2.1.47–49).10 Romeo 
has overheard the entire speech hidden in the darkness of the garden, which 
stands in contrast to Arthur  Brooke’s version of the story, which features a 
longish monologue by Juliet (Bullough 1957: 296–297) in the seclusion of 
her bedroom. Romeo’s eavesdropping seems to be a Shakespearean innova-
tion. Shakespeare’s Romeo, then, takes Juliet’s lines as his cue, self-selects 
himself for the next turn11 and steps forward, addressing Juliet with “I take 
thee at thy  word. /  Call me  but love, and I’ll  be  new baptized: / Hence-
forth I never will be Romeo” (Oxford 2.1.92–94; Arden 2.1.49–51). These are 
not bad lines, since they refer to Juliet’s argument about the arbitrariness of 
names and signal that the speaker has overheard her speech. Unfortunately, 
they are lost on Juliet, who is simply too surprised to attend properly to the 
utterance. As a consequence, Romeo’s elegant self-identification fails, too. Yet 
young Montague perseveres in his endeavour, and now that he has Juliet’s full 
attention, he succeeds with his second attempt (Oxford 2.1.96–100; Arden 

“ 2.1.53–57). Again, he alludes to her preceding speech and addresses her as 
 dear saint” (Oxford 2.1.98; Arden 2.1.55). This form of address connects the 
shadowy figure in the garden with the young man at the ball and functions as 
the shibboleth for the two protagonists.

182
                          “Wouldst thou withdraw love’s faithful vow?”               173

       Yet Juliet, although clearly positively affected by Romeo’s sudden entry, 
is in no mood to continue in the playful spirit of their last encounter. Her “Art 
thou not Romeo, and a Montague?” (Oxford 2.1.103; Arden 2.1.60), which 
Romeo tries to counter lamely with his “Neither, fair maid, if either thee dis-
like” (Oxford 2.1.104; Arden 2.1.61), touches upon the sore spot of his family 
affiliation and all it implies. The following turns (Oxford 2.1.105–127; Arden 
2.1.62–84) show the two talking, at least stylistically, at cross purposes. Juliet’s 
(“brief utterances, often no longer than one line, focus on concrete questions 
  By whose direction found’st thou  out this place?” Oxford 2.1.122; Arden 
2.1.79) and dangers (“If  they do see thee, they will  murder thee” Oxford 
2.1.113; Arden 2.1.70), whereas Romeo’s answers keep up the high poetic 
style of his former speeches. It is only after some time that Juliet seems to 
have found her inner balance again. She, in contrast to her predecessor in 
Brooke, does not have the chance to sort things out soliloquisingly in  the 
privacy of her bedroom before meeting again with her beloved. Romeo has 
committed a grave interactional sin by overhearing, albeit accidentally, what 
was never intended for anyone else’s ears. He may be forgiven for his trespass, 
but he should never have gone on record with information  gathered from 
her speech. Firstly, it is a question of tact and the discovery of Juliet’s feelings 
severely impinges upon her interactional freedom. Secondly, a lady has to 
be careful not to give away her feelings before she can be certain of a man’s 
sincerity—as Brooke’s Juliet makes explicit:

(1) Juliet What if  his suttel brayne to fayne have taught his tong, 
               And so the snake that lurkes in grasse thy tender hart hash stong? 
               What if  with frendly speache the traytor lye in wayte,
               As oft the poysond hooke is hid, wraps in the pleasant bayte? 
                                                        (Bullough  1957: 296, ll. 385–388)

A  woman evidently has to  be wary and test  the sincerity  of her  suitor,12 
although Shakespeare’s Juliet seems to be less concerned with this aspect 
and more troubled by the restriction  of her interactional possibilities. The 
fact that Romeo has witnessed Juliet’s soliloquy makes it impossible for her 
to play the traditional role of the “reluctant” or  even “cruel” lady. As a con-
sequence, the interactional equilibrium between suitor and  lady has been 
severely disturbed. Arthur Brooke’s couple can make do with the traditional 
role distribution of active suitor and conceding lady, but Shakespeare’s com-
plication of the plot  calls for a less conventional solution. It is therefore no 
deliberate decision by Juliet to “refuse [  . .  . ]  to engage further  in  these 
elaborate, ritualized negotiations and exchanges of erotic power that consti-
tute courtship” as Callaghan (1994: 81) argues. Romeo’s open references to 

183
174                                       Thomas Honegger

her lines has rendered their content on-record, i.e. Juliet knows that Romeo 
knows and that he wants her to know that he knows, so that Juliet no longer 
has the option of simply ignoring her self-exposure and relying on his tact. 
As it is, she cannot, and probably does not want to unsay her confession of 
love. Yet she is likewise reluctant to continue their conversation or to accept 
Romeo’s protestations of love before having clarified some points. Her long 
address is of great import for the further development of their relationship:

(2) Juliet Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face, 
               Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek 
               For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.         130
               Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain  deny 
               What I  have spoke; but farewell, compliment. 
               Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say ‘Ay’, 
               And I  will  take thy word; yet if thou swear’st,
               Thou mayst prove false. At lovers’ perjuries                  135
               They say Jove laughs. O gentle, Romeo, 
               If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully; 
               Or if  thou thinkest I am too quickly won, 
               I’ll  frown and be perverse and say thee nay,
               So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.13              140
               In truth,  fair Montague, I am too fond,
               And therefore thou mayst think my behaviour light; 
               But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove more true 
               Than those that have the coying to be strange.
               I should have been more strange, I must confess,        145
               But that thou overheard’st, ere I was ware, 
               My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me, 
               And not impute this yielding  to light love, 
               Which  the dark night hash so discovered.
                                             (Oxford  2.1.128–149; Arden 2.1.85–106)

Juliet renders explicit the physical symptoms of her embarrassment in the 

(“ first lines of her speech. These references function as “in-built” stage props 
  night,  Juliet blushes”) for effects that  would not  be easy to bring  about 
spontaneously. Furthermore, Juliet’s lines convey to Romeo that she is  a 

184
                          “Wouldst thou withdraw love’s faithful vow?”               175

maiden who has lost considerable face due to his eavesdropping, and that the 
content of her soliloquy, and especially her confession of love, is now a mutu-
ally acknowledged on-record topic (Romeo now knows that she knows that 
he knows). The central problem of love, however, is touched upon only after 
she has given this metacomment on their interactional mishap which pre-
vents her from making her confession of love in style. In the following, she 
pays Romeo back in kind. He is forced to listen to another “soliloquy”, yet 
this time his declaration of love is taken for granted, analysed, and discussed. 
Whatever Romeo’s interactional shortcomings, he would certainly not have 

“ cast his confession in the form of the monosyllabic, pitifully un-Petrarchan 
 Ay”, but would certainly “fain have dwelt on form”.14 Juliet signals that they 
have gone beyond matters of form. It is clear to her that Romeo wants her to 
believe that he loves her in return. Yet although she wants to believe it, and 
tells him that  she does so, she is aware of the danger inherent in accepting 
his protestation of love without further proof. Unfortunately, the traditional 
formats and scripts  for initiating   a love  relationship have been rendered 
useless by Romeo’s eavesdropping, so that she cannot “test” him by playing 
hard to get. Juliet alludes to this in her offer to act the part of the reluctant 
lady if he wishes her to do so. She knows that very often “the  form is the 
message” and if Romeo needs more “traditional” proof of her constancy and 
chaste virtue—and maybe an occasion to produce some verses “To His Coy 
Mistress”—then he is welcome to it. Besides this, she signals that she, for 
her part, would prefer to do without  the conventional trappings of wooing. 
This may be also the meaning of her request that Romeo “pronounce it [i.e. 
his love] faithfully”  (Oxford 2.1.137; Arden 2.1.94). In brief, her speech can 
be interpreted as a plea to abandon the traditional interactional patterns and 
to talk,  if not  exactly business, then at least more plainly than Petrarchan 
lovers in general, and Romeo in particular, are wont to do.15
       The following  exchange, then, is dominated by Juliet’s endeavour to re-
establish her interactional sovereignty and motivate Romeo to abandon his 
Petrarchan effusions. Consequently, she cuts short his attempts to bring about 
his protestation of  sincere love in style by playing on  her “light”  (Oxford 
2.1.148; Arden 2.1.105) and “dark” (Oxford  2.1.149; Arden 2.1.106). Her 
critical gloss on his choice of metaphor catches him completely unawares. As 
yet he has had dealings only with Rosaline, who kept both her silence and her 
distance, and his one encounter with Juliet at the feast has been harmoniously 
collaborative, with her following his metaphoric lead. Juliet’s unexpected in-
terruption stops him dead in his Petrarchan tracks and he asks: “What shall 
I swear by?” (Oxford 2.1.155; Arden 2.1.112).16 His second, presumably also 
Petrarchan attempt to swear his love does not get beyond the first five words 
before Juliet intervenes again, calls the entire interaction into question, and 
makes a move to terminate their late-night conversation:

185
176                                       Thomas Honegger

(3) Juliet I have no joy of this contract tonight:
               It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
               Too like the lightning  which doth cease to be
               Ere one can say ‘It lightens’. Sweet, good night.
               This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath,
               May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.17  165
               Good night, good night. [  . . . ]
                                           (Oxford  2.1.160–166; Arden 2.1.117–123).

This, then, is  sufficient to put  a stop to Romeo’s poetic outpourings, even 
though Juliet is considerate enough to sweeten the pill of (temporary) rejec-
tion.18 His incredulous question  “O  wilt  thou  leave me  so unsatisfied?” 
(Oxford  2.1.168; Arden 2.1.125)  marks his sudden fall  from  Petrarchan 
heights and prompts Juliet to  ask for  disambiguation: “What  satisfaction 
canst thou have tonight?” (Oxford 2.1.169; Arden 2.1.126). Romeo’s answer, 
then, finally hits the right  tone. His “Th’exchange of thy love’s faithful vow 
for mine” (Oxford 2.1.170; Arden 2.1.127) is simple, unpretentious, and has 
the ring of truthfulness.  Furthermore, it  establishes the spirit of mutuality 
that has been absent from their interaction in  the orchard so far. Romeo’s 
“Wouldst  thou  withdraw  it  [i.e.  love’s faithful  vow]? For  what  purpose, 
love?”19 (Oxford 2.1.173; Arden 2.1.130) brings about the final restitution 
of Juliet’s interactional freedom that has been so severely infringed by his 
unnoticed presence in the garden. She is given the opportunity to take back 
her words without denying them, to return to the moment before she uttered 
the fateful lines  and to retake her decision. It  is this  imaginary construct 
that enables Juliet to overcome the interactional impasse which has been 
the direct consequence of the informational imbalance created by Romeo’s 
eavesdropping. So far, Juliet has not been able to act freely or to negotiate 
the terms of the interaction that has been sprung on her. The first part has 
been dominated by her effort to win back her interactional rights. Now that 
she has succeeded in doing so, she is finally able to give vent to her feelings 
as she wants and to dwell on form:

(4) Juliet My bounty is as boundless as the sea, 
                My love as deep; the more I give to thee, 
                The more I have, for both are infinite.
                                            (Oxford 2.1.176–178; Arden 2.1.133–135)

186
                          “Wouldst thou withdraw love’s faithful vow?”               177

She not only reverts to Petrarchan language,20 but also takes up Romeo’s sea 
image from before (Oxford 2.1.125–126; Arden 2.1.82–83) and thus signals 
her willingness to enter into a love-relationship with Romeo.
       The harmony between the lovers is hardly re-established when the be-
ginnings of a potential joint action are disrupted by the outside world in form 
of the  nurse, whose interference will punctuate the  remaining exchanges. 
When Juliet again addresses Romeo,21 she seems to have taken the cue for 
her next turn from the intrusion of the outside world:

(5) Juliet Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.       185 
               If that thy  bent of love be honourable,
               Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
               By one that I’ll procure to come to thee,
               Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
               And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll  lay,                           190 
               And follow thee, my lord, throughout the world.
    Nurse (within) Madam!
    Juliet  I  come, anon!—But if thou meanest not well;
               I do beseech thee—
    Nurse (within) Madam!                                                              195 
    Juliet  By and by, I come!—
               To cease thy strive and leave me to my grief.
               Tomorrow I will  send.
                                            (Oxford 2.1.185–198; Arden 2.1.142–153)

Petrarchan “luf-talkyng” has rather quickly given way to no-nonsense mar-

[ riage talk or, as Whittier   (1989: 37)  formulates it  more elegantly:  “She 
   Juliet] readily harnesses Eros in social form.” We are obviously no longer in 
the world of chivalry where the suitor has to prove his worth and the sinceri-
ty of his love by means of long-drawn service or suitable chivalric exploits. In 
Shakespeare’s Verona—and also in his London—it is the suitor’s willingness 
to commit  himself in  marriage to  his beloved that proves his honourable 
intentions. This is not so conspicuous in Romeo and Juliet because the main 
focus is on the first  encounter and the climactic falling  in love of the  two 
protagonists, but it is nevertheless there. Juliet’s linking of “honourable love” 
and “marriage” is, of course, a rather obvious hint  at what Romeo should 
have done, namely to declare his love and to propose. Yet Romeo is too pre-
occupied with love to proceed immediately to the “business” part.

187
178                                       Thomas Honegger

       The text analysed in the preceding paragraphs differs considerably from 
the First to the Second Quartos and so does, as a result, the interpretation of 
the exchange. Many lines of the passage discussed above, namely lines 164 to 
178, do not occur in the text of the First Quarto; Juliet’s wish for a pause for 
thought is immediately followed by the first interruption of their night-time 
conversation and her offer of marriage (see Praetorius 1886: 26–27). The lat-
ter is not introduced by the preceding exchange and, as a consequence, comes 
rather as a surprise. The text of the Second Quarto, with its mitigating pas-
sage that re-establishes some understanding between the lovers, is therefore, 
from an interactional point of view, preferable.

( The      third  and final  part of the  interaction between Romeo and Juliet 
 Oxford 2.1.204–235; Arden 2.1.158–193) is much more harmonious than 
the preceding ones. The important questions concerning their relationship 
have been discussed and agreed on, and the interactional imbalance created by 
Romeo’s faux pas has been corrected. The shared metaphors derived from the 
world of falconry are, on a stylistic level, an expression of this re-established 
harmony, and after agreeing on the time for  the messenger, there remains 
nothing much to do. Yet the two lovers are loath to part and fill in time with 
lines on remembering and forgetting (Oxford 2.1.216–221; Arden 2.1.170–
175). This brief passage has neither dramatic interest nor poetic metaphors to 
recommend itself and is mostly phatic in function. It provides, in its simplicity 
and even-handed distribution of turns, an appropriate penultimate chord to 
the interactional piece that began with the first encounter at the feast. The final 
chord comprises Juliet’s resumption of the falcon metaphor (Oxford 2.1.223–
227; Arden 2.1.177–181) and ends in the couplets spoken by the lovers ( Juliet: 
Oxford 2.1.230–231; Arden 2.1.184–185; Romeo: Oxford 2.1.232–235; Ar-
den 2.1.186–193).22 The “dissonance” that characterised the first part of their 
encounter in the orchard is counterbalanced, the two lovers part in concord, 
and the initial phase of their relationship comes to a conclusion.

                            4.  Conclusion:  Shakespeare at Work
We  have already pointed  out  some of   the  most important   differences 
between Shakespeare’s presentation of the lovers and the one in his probable 
source, Brooke’s Romeus and Juliet. There are, apart from the alterations due 
to the transfer from  novella to drama, namely the dialogisation of  all rel-
evant information and the condensation of narrative time, two momentous 
changes which are not (primarily) motivated by the exigencies of adapting 
a narrative for stage performance. Firstly, the initial encounter between the 
two at the feast is cast in the form of a jointly  composed sonnet. Secondly, 
Romeus’s conventional declaration of love and his offer of marriage during 
the balcony scene in Arthur Brooke’s text are replaced by a complex passage 
that comprises not only a reversal of roles but also considerable interactional 

188
                          “Wouldst thou withdraw love’s faithful vow?”               179

complications. Shakespeare, in terms of  plot  organisation  and dramatic 
structure, shifts the focus from the confession of love to the first encounter 
and the falling  in love. The interactional climax  of the first  phase in their 
relationship is thus not identical with the actual declaration of love, but, in 
the framework advocated in Castiglione’s The Book of the Courtier, would 
coincide with  the  first  tentative  explorations undertaken by  the socially 
competent courtier, which then may be followed by a more direct confession 
of love. The first  encounter and the falling in love would be, in a less con-
densed account, more clearly separated from the actual declaration of love 
by intervening events, which would allow for two independent focal points. 
Shakespeare’s dramatic compression of the interaction between the  two 
lovers does not favour such a solution. He packs most of the declaration’s 
poetic and dramatic potential into the joint sonnet so that it has the impact 

( one usually expects from the confession of love proper. Nicholas Brooke’s 
 1968: 98) confusion of the lovers’ first meeting at the feast with the ensuing 
betrothal in act 2 (orchard scene) and his evaluation of “betrothal” and wed-
ding proves this point: “The betrothal [i.e. the sonnet-encounter at the feast 
or, as Brooke (1968: 106) also calls it, ‘the dance-betrothal of Act  I’]  was 
given maximum ceremonial as the climax to Act I; the wedding is reduced 
to an absolute minimum  in the  end of Act  II.”  It  is also noteworthy  that 
Shakespeare has not conflated the sequence of falling in love with an imme-
diate confession, but kept them somewhat apart. This separation allows him 
to exploit  the strengths of  both  sequences. The emotional impact of the 
first meeting  is not adulterated or watered down by the admixture  of ele-
ments that would detract from the elated Petrarchan mood. The two young 
people have as yet no idea of their respective identities so that the inception 
of their love is not hindered by social considerations. The discussion of such 
disquieting and potentially disruptive issues as family membership and the 
problem of how to cast their  love in concrete social forms are relegated to 
the ensuing orchard scene. By means of the joint sonnet, Shakespeare has 
come as close as possible to what Barthes (1977/1990: 150) “hallucinates” 

[ about: “I hallucinate what is empirically impossible: that our two profferings 
 i.e. confessions of love] be made at the same time: that one does not follow 
the other, as if it depended on it.”
       Shakespeare, because he has played his strongest “emotional card” in 
the fashioning of the first encounter, must have felt that a conventional con-
fession of love would offer  little  dramatic interest. Furthermore, from  the 
point of  view of narrative organisation it  would add nothing  new towards 
the development of either characters or plot. His decision to deviate from 
the traditional pattern creates new dramatic interest and opens new possibili-
ties for protagonist characterisation and plot development. As a consequence, 
Juliet increasingly gains a voice of her own. Romeo’s lyric praise of her beauty 

189
180                                            Thomas Honegger

(Oxford  1.4.157–166;  Arden  1.5.43–52)  is not yet matched by a similar speech 
on her  part, but  already  their  first  face-to-face   encounter  is characterised  by 
the fact  that   Juliet  contributes   her part   to  the  sonnet—even  though   she is 
still  largely  following   Romeo’s  lead. Her  overheard  soliloquy   in  the orchard 
and the  ensuing conversation  with   Romeo  then show  her as a person  who is 
able to speak her own  mind,  who refuses to  be imposed upon  by Romeo’s Pe-
trarchan  rhetoric,  and who  fights  for  her right   to declare her  love in  her own 
words and  style. This development   reaches its climax  in  the  epithalamium,   a 
form  traditionally    assigned to  the  bridegroom,   yet  here spoken  by  Juliet  in 
expectation  of  her  newly  wed  Romeo   (Oxford   3.2.1–31;   Arden  3.2.1–31). 
As Böschenbröker   (1996:  52) notes,  this reversal  of conventional   roles turns 
Juliet “zum   Subjekt,  das in  eigener  Verantwortung   spricht   and  handelt  and 
sich somit   gleichberechtigt   neben  Romeo  stellt”  ‘into   a subject  who  speaks 
and acts in her  own  right  and thus  makes herself Romeo’s  peer’.

                                                         Notes

         1. See, for example, Rudanko (1993), the numerous publications by Norman 
F. Blake and Brown and Gilman (1989).
         2.  I  quote from  The  Oxford Shakespeare edition by Levenson (2000). The 
(references to the Arden edition  are to The Arden Shakespeare edited by Gibbons 
 1980). I prefer Levenson’s (2000) edition of  Romeo and Juliet because it gives the 

( text of the Second (or “Good”) Quarto (1599) and does not conflate it with the First 
 or “Bad”) Quarto  (1597), the text of which is printed  in an appendix at the end of 
the book.
         3. See Bullough (1957: 284–363) for Brooke’s text.
         4.  See Muller   (1995: 323): “Drastisch   formuliert,  benutzt  er,  wenn auch 
vielleicht nicht bewusst, die Sprache der Liebeslyrik der Renaissance als Mittel der 
Verfüthrung.”
         5. Quoted from Robert de Blois’s (f l. 1233–1266) Chastoiement des dames (Fox 
1950:136, l. 127). Translation: The kiss attracts other things.
         6. See Perella (1969: 143) on the influence of this concept: “There is no doubt 
that the  soul-in-the-kiss  image received its  greatest impetus in  the  Renaissance 
through Castiglione’s presentation, for no man of  letters could be ignorant  of the 
Book of the Courtier. Henceforth the conceit was destined to become one of the most 
abused commonplaces in the literature of love.”
         7. Twentieth-century  iconographic convention, as evidenced in  movies and 
TV series, has it that the ratification of a kiss’s meaning occurs immediately after its 
completion—either with a gasping for breath and renewed kissing or, if things have 
not yet been properly sorted out, with a gasp followed by a clout.
         8.  Fritz  (1999: 148) gives the translation  “Ihr  küsst nach  allen Regeln der 
Kunst.” Müller  (1995: 322–323) interprets Juliet’s comment as follows: “Für sie folgt 
Romeo als Liebender zu sehr literarischen Modellen und höfischen Etikettbüchern. 
Sein Kuss ist für sie kein echter, sondern ein literarischer Kuss.” This point of view 
is shared by Bly (1996: 100), who calls it “a mild rebuke”. Brooke (1968: 95) sees it 
as a rejection of Romeo’s effort to continue in the same mode: “The formality which 

190
                             “Wouldst  thou withdraw love’s faithful vow?”                       181



( was right, is now wrong, once the pattern is completed in its final cadence.” Leisi 
 1997: 103), however, translates Juliet’s sentence as “Ihr habt das Küssen aber raus”, 
i.e. as a compliment.
           9. Colie  (1974: 140)  points out:  “Romeo  by no  means abandons sonnet-
language because he has in fact fallen truly in love.”
         10. Juliet, who  has formerly always used you to address Romeo, changes to 
thou in her “soliloquy” and continues in the  ensuing dialogue. Her use of thou can 
be interpreted first  as a sign of fear and indignation about the intrusion,  but then 

( as a sign of her affection for Romeo. See Finkenstaedt (1963: 91–173) and Stein 
 2003) for a discussion of the pronouns of address in the sixteenth (and seventeenth) 
centuries.
         11. See Sacks, Schegloff, and Jefferson (1974/1998) for the organisation of 
turn-taking.  Since Juliet  intended her speech as a soliloquy, there are no  proper 
transition relevance places.
         12. See also Rychard Hyrd’s (1540) translation of Juan Luis Vives’s Instruction 
of a Christian Woman (1523), which gives the following  warning:  “Give  none ear 
unto the lover, no  more than thou  wouldst do unto  an enchanter or sorcerer. For 
he cometh pleasantly and flattering, first praising the maid, showing her how he is 
taken with the  love of her beauty, and that he must be dead for her love, for these 
lovers know well enough the vainglorious minds of many, which have a great delight 
in their  own  praises, wherewith  they be caught like  as the  birder  beguileth the 
birds—” (quoted in Neely 1985: 12).

“ 13.        These lines seem to contradict Wells’s (1998: 916) assessment of Juliet as 
 young and inexperienced. Unlike these men-about-town, she does not know that 
according to the rules of the game that Romeo is playing, you are meant to be cold 
and aloof when your lover reveals his wounded heart, and that you are supposed to 
freeze the flames of his passion with your icy disdain. Instead she tells him  she is 
in love and asks him if he loves her. [ . . . ]  Such simplicity is touching.” A  careful 
reading of the relevant passage also reveals that her handling of the interaction with 
Romeo evidences less touching simplicity than emotional sincerity under difficult 
conditions.
         14. Declarations of  love often function  like  performatives. It  is therefore of 
some importance that  the lover himself  is  able to give  expression to his love  in 
suitable words.

“ 15.        It  is  not by  accident that she uses, among others, the form  of  address 
 fair  Montague” (Oxford  2.1.141; Arden 2.1.98), thus focussing on Romeo’s socio-
political situation.
         16. Romeo, in the same line in the First Quarto, is given yet another abortive 
attempt at protesting his love: “Now by” (Praetorius 1886: 26).
         17. Juliet’s metaphor echoes that of Romeo’s father in  Oxford  1.1.147–149; 
Arden 1.1.149–151, who compared the effect of Romeo’s private suffering to a “bud 
bit with an envious worm / Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air / Or dedicate 
his beauty to the same.”
         18. Not so in the text  of the First Quarto. See Praetorius (1886: 26–27).
         19. The simple yet intimate  form of address that Romeo uses now for Juliet, 
namely “love”, is also indicative of the change in tone.
         20. Colie (1974: 143) comments on the lovers’ Petrarchan language and makes 
an important  point:  “As we look  back over the lovers’ utterance, we can see very 
plainly the  problem of  expression: petrarchan language, the vehicle for  amorous 

191
182                                                   Thomas  Honegger


emotion,   can be  used merely   as the  cliché  which   Mercutio    and  Benvolio   criticize; 
or, it  can be earned  by a lover’s experience  of  the profound   oppositions   to which   that 
rhetoric  of  oxymoron   points.  When   Romeo  and  Juliet  seek to express their   feelings’ 
force,  they   return    constantly   to   petrarchanisms    hallowed    with   use—but   having 
watched  their   development   as lovers,  an audience  can  accept as valid   the  language 
upon which   they  must  fall  back.”
          21.   Neither     the    First    nor   the    Second   Quarto     has   a   stage  direction. 
Circumstantial    evidence makes  it likely   that  Juliet  exits and  re-enters  a few moments 
later at  2.1.185.
          22.   Levenson  (2000:    219)  follows   the  line-attribution      of  the   First   Quarto. 
(The Second  Quarto   ascribes  “Iu.  Sleep  dwel  vpon  thine   eyes, peace in   thy  breast” 
 Greg  1949,  ll.ii.187)   to  Juliet  and  has Romeo  speak  two  additional   couplets  which 
are repeated virtually    unchanged   at the  beginning   of  2.2.

                                                       Works         Cited

Barthes, Roland.  1977/1990. A  Lover’s Discourse. Fragments. (Translated from French by 
          Richard   Howard.   Title   of  the  original:   Fragments d’un  discour amoureux. 1977.) 
          Harmondsworth:  Penguin Books.
Bly, Mary. 1996. Bawdy puns and lustful virgins:  The legacy of Juliet’s desire in comedies of 
          the early 1600s. In: Stanley Wells (ed.). Romeo and Juliet and Its Afterlife. (Shakespeare 
          Survey 49). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 97–109.
Böschenbröker, Rita. 1996. Repräsentationen der Liebe in Romeo and Juliet: das Epithalamium. 
          Shakespeare Jahrbuch 132, 44–57.
Brooke, Arthur.  1562. The Tragicall  Historye  of Romeus and Juliet. In: Geoffrey  Bullough 
          (ed.). 1957. Narrative  and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare. Volume I. Early Comedies, 
          Poems, Romeo and Juliet. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 284–363.
Brooke, Nicholas. 1968. Shakespeare’s Early Tragedies. London: Methuen.
Brown, Roger,  and Albert   Gilman.  1989. Politeness theory and  Shakespeare’s four major 
          tragedies. Language in Society 18, 159–212.
Bullough, Geoffrey  (ed.). 1957. Narrative and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare. Volume I. Early 
          Comedies, Poems, Romeo and Juliet. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
Callaghan, Dympna C. 1994. The ideology of romantic love: The case of Romeo and Juliet. In: 
          Dympna  C. Callaghan, Lorraine Helms  and Jyotsna Singh (eds.). The Weyward Sisters. 
          Shakespeare and Feminist Politics. Oxford: Blackwell, 59–101.
Colie, Rosalie L. 1974. Shakespeare’s Living Art. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cox,  Virginia   (ed.). 1994.  Count  Baldassare Castiglione: The Book of the Courtier. (First 
          published   1528.  Translated  by  Sir   Thomas   Hoby  1552–1555,  published  1561. 
          Everyman Library).  London:  Dent.
Finkenstaedt, Thomas. 1963.  You and Thou:  Studien zur Anrede im Englischen (mit einem 
          Exkurs  zur Anrede im  Deutschen). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Fox, John  Howard  (ed.).  1950. Robert de Blois: Son oeuvre didactique et narrative. Paris: 
          Nizet.
Fritz, Ulrike  (ed. and trans.). 1999. Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet / Romeo und Julia. (Englisch-
          deutsche Studienausgabe). Tübingen: Stauffenburg.
Gibbons,  Brian  (ed.).  1980. The  Arden Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet. (Reprinted 1997.) 
          London:  Nelson.
Greg,  W.  W.  (ed.).  1949.  Romeo and Juliet. Second Quarto, 1599. (Shakespeare Quarto 
          Facsimiles 6.) London: The  Shakespeare Association and Sidgwickand Jackson. 

192
                                 “Wouldst   thou  withdraw    love’s faithful   vow?”                           183


Honegger, Thomas. 2005. Die Transformation  der höfischen Liebe in  Shakespeare’s Romeo 
          und Julia. Jenaer Universitätsreden 17, 201–217.
Leisi, Ernst.  1997. Problemwörter und Problemstellen in Shakespeares Dramen. Stauffenburg: 
          Stauffenburg.
Levenson, Jill  L.   (ed.). 2000.  The Oxford Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet. Oxford: Oxford 
          University  Press.
Levin, Harry.  1960. Form and formality  in Romeo and Juliet. Shakespeare Quarterly 11, 3–11.
Müller,  Wolfgang G.  1995. ‘Kiss me, Kate’: Zur Semantik and Ästhetik  der Darstellung des 
          Kusses in der englischen Literatur. Literaturwissenschaftliches Jahrbuch 36, 315–337.
Neely, Carol Thomas. 1985. Broken Nuptials in Shakespeare’s Plays. New Haven and London: 
          Yale University Press.
Perella, Nicolas  James. 1969.  The Kiss Sacred and Profane. Berkeley  and  Los  Angeles: 
          University  of California  Press.
Praetorius, Charles (ed.). 1886. Romeo and Juliet. The First Quarto, 1597. (A Facsimile from 
          the British  Museum Copy  C 34 k 55). London:  Praetorius.
Rudanko, Juhani. 1993. Pragmatic Approaches to Shakespeare. Essays on Othello, Coriolanus and 
          Timon of Athens. Lanham, New York and London: University  of America Press.
Sacks, Harvey, Emanuel A. Schegloff and Gail Jefferson. 1974/1998. A simplest systematics 
          for  the  organization of  turn-taking   for  conversation. (Originally   published 1974 in 
          Language 50, 696–735). In:  Asa Kasher (ed.). 1998.  Communication, Interaction and 
          Discourse. (Volume 5 of Pragmatics: Critical Concepts. Six volumes). London and New 
          York: Routledge, 193–242.
Stein, Dieter. 2003.  Pronominal  usage in Shakespeare. In: Irma Taavitsainen and Andreas 
          H.   Jucker (eds.). Diachronic Perspectives on Address Term Systems. Amsterdam and 
          Philadelphia:  John Benjamins, 251–307.
Wells, Robin Headlam.  1998. Neo-Petrarchan kitsch in  Romeo and Juliet. Modern Language 
          Review 93, 913–933.
Whittier,   Gayle.  1989. The  sonnet’s body and  the body  sonnetized in   Romeo and Juliet. 
          Shakespeare Quarterly 40, 27–41.

194
                                  DARYL       W.    PALMER


          Motion       and    Mercutio       in    Romeo      and     Juliet







       There is nothing permanent that is not true, what can be true that 
       is uncertaine? How can that be certaine, that stands upon uncertain 
       grounds?1
It   is  by now a commonplace in modern scholarship that drama, particu-
larly Tudor  drama, poses questions, rehearses familiar debates, and even 
speculates about mere possibilities.2 In 1954, Madeleine Doran spelled out 
some of the ways in which  debate “affected the structure of  Elizabethan 
drama.”3 In  turn,  Joel B.  Altman,   having  eloquently extended Doran’s 
examination, concludes that “the plays functioned as media of intellectual 
and emotional exploration for minds that were accustomed to examine the 
many sides of a given theme, to entertain opposing ideals, and by so exercis-
ing the understanding, to move toward some fuller  apprehension of truth 
that could be discerned only through the total  action of the drama.”4 Alt-
man points to Henry Medwall’s Fulgens and Lucres (c. 1490) as an exemplar 
of this practice. Although the interlude instructs and entertains, “the center 
of interest has shifted from demonstration to inquiry. The  action develops 
not from  an abstract assertion, but from  a  specific question: who is  the 
nobler man, Cornelius or Gaius?”5 By the time William Shakespeare began 
to write his plays, inquiry was an essential part of dramatic construction. So 
Juliet asks, “What’s in a name?”6 Hamlet opens with the question: “Who’s 



Philosophy and Literature, Volume 30, Number 2 (October 2006): pp. 540–554. Copyright © 
2006 The Johns Hopkins University Press.

                                                       185

195
186                                        Daryl W. Palmer


“ there?” (1.1.1), and achieves a kind of apotheosis in the figure of its hero: 
 To be, or not to be, that is the question . . .” (3.1.55). Everyone recognizes 
these familiar questions, and we know (or think we know) how to describe 
the most viable answers. I want to  suggest, however, that this familiarity 
has dulled our appreciation of the drama’s interrogative range. As a way of 
resisting this tendency, I want to argue that Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet 
takes up an ancient conversation about motion, a dialog that originates with 
the pre-Socratics. This is not to say that the play is ultimately about motion. 
It obviously engages a panoply of thematic materials. I have simply chosen, 
in this  limited  space, to concentrate on the way the playwright stages his 

“ questioning as a kind of fencing lesson. My goal is to  produce neither a 
 reading” of the play nor an allegory of philosophy, but rather to recollect the 
ways in which Shakespeare’s drama qualifies and extends an ancient inter-
rogative tradition. In so doing, I follow  Stanley Cavell who maintains “that 
Shakespeare could not be who he is—the burden of the name of the great-

— est writer in the language, the creature of the greatest ordering of English 
   unless his writing  is engaging the depth of the philosophical preoccupa-
tions of his culture.”7 
       Some of the  most venerable documents of Western philosophy fix on 
the problem of motion. If we go back more than 2,300 years, we come upon 
Plato’s Theaetetus, in which Socrates explains a “first principle” to the title 
character, namely that “the universe really is motion and nothing else.”8 A 
kind of history lesson in ontology and epistemology, this tentative explanation 
 has its origins in Heraclitus or Empedocles or Protagoras or some combina-
tion of the aforementioned. Perhaps the most famous expression of this ideal 
comes from Heraclitus: “You cannot step twice into the same river, for other 
waters and yet others go ever flowing on.”9 More to the point is the follow-
ing declaration from the same philosopher: “Everything flows and nothing 
abides; everything gives way and nothing stays fixed.”10 In this spirit, Pro-
tagoras declares, “All matter is in a state of flux.”11 Such precedents provide 
the backdrop for Socrates in the Theaetetus as he summarizes: “The point is 
that all these things are, as we were saying, in motion, but there is a quickness 
or slowness in their motion” (Thea, 156c). In this historical spirit, he identi-
fies “a tradition from the ancients, who hid their meaning from the common 
herd in poetical figures, that Oceanus and Tethys, the source of all things, are 
flowing streams and nothing is at rest” (Thea, 180d–e). 
       To  be sure, the dialog depends on the rehearsal of such positions, but 
far more important for our purpose is Plato’s attempt, through the figure of 
Socrates, to grasp motion through dialog. More inclined toward Parmenides’ 
distrust of motion, Socrates has, from the outset, been setting up the terms of 
inquiry in a form that anticipates the dramatic shape of the Renaissance play 
by fixing the (ineffable) object of study so that it gives up its essence, its being. 

196
                             Motion and Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet                187

Contemporary critics and philosophers will of course raise many objections 
to this motive,12 and rightly so; but in the conversation I want to trace, the 
motive endures dramatically. Plato even pays attention to character. From 
the outset, Theaetetus marks himself as a green pupil, charming and polite. 
The young fellow finds Socrates’ talk hard to follow. He becomes wary: “Real- 
ly, I am not sure, Socrates. I cannot even make out about you, whether you 

( are stating this as something you believe or merely putting me to the test” 
 Thea, 157c). As Shakespeare will always emphasize, character emerges out of 
dialog. Human disposition inflects inquiry. Maturity affects analysis. 
       Assuming that  every change is a “motion,” Socrates proceeds to con-
front his  pupil with  the  difficult  task of studying motion  only in  terms of 
motion, change in terms of change. That which fixes undoes what we study, 
but how difficult  to adhere to such an injunction! Later in this dialog, The-
odorus complains of thinkers who attempt such a task: “Faithful to their own 
treatises they are literally in perpetual motion; their capacity for staying still 
to attend to an argument or a question or for a quiet interchange of question 
and answer amounts to less than nothing . . .” (Thea, 179e–180a). According 
to his plan, Plato is preparing his readers to admit that they can only have 
knowledge of being. That which is ever becoming (something other) may be 
perceived, but not known. Motion, if it  can be probed at all, will register as 
perception, not knowledge, a crucial distinction for what follows because lit-
erary scholarship often conflates perception and knowledge (Thea, 186e).13 
       This  is not to  say that Shakespeare read a given dialog by Plato as a 
source the way he read Ovid. To approach the Renaissance is to encoun-
ter Plato in every nook and cranny. We know, in general, that early modern 
thinkers read Plato, but his presence was more ubiquitous than simple cita-
tion would indicate.14 Paul F. Grendler explains that “The Renaissance drew 
upon a centuries-old tradition  whose roots went back to Plato’s Laws and 
Republic, as well as Christian antiquity . . .”15 With more particular appli-
cation to Shakespeare’s world, Sears Jayne declares, “at no time during the 
Renaissance were the English people ever limited, as the myth suggests, to a 
single conception of Plato; rather, they knew about Plato from many different 
sources, and entertained several different conceptions of his work.”16 Finally, 
Melissa Lane describes the way the philosopher’s heirs have understood their 
role in the  conversation: Plato “was, after all, Aristotle’s teacher and a key 
source for Ciceronian Rome and Augustinian Christianity. And  this status 
made him a magnet in the search for originality—both as the beginning and 
as the inspired genius.”17 
       I  take this  “search” to be paradigmatic for subsequent centuries as it 
pops up in learned books and busy streets, even among the rapiers and dag-
gers of Elizabethan London. As J. D. Aylward puts it in The English Master 
of Arms, most Englishmen of the period wanted to associate themselves with 

197
188                                        Daryl W. Palmer

the practice of swordplay.18 Theater audiences relished the expert fencing 
of actors.19 London buzzed with talk of Continental  fencing masters who 
claimed followings in their  schools and in print. To these masters, fencing 
was both physical and mental, a palpable conflict and the basis for intellec-
tual dialog. Vincentio Saviolo illustrates this  motive in his Practice (1595). 
For Saviolo, combat comes down to discernment. He complains that “There 
are many that when they come to fight, runne on headlong without discre-
tion.”20 In this same spirit, Giacomo Grassi warns his readers of the need 
for judgment, noting  that, “amongst divers disorderlie  blowes, you might 
have seen some of them most  gallant lie  bestowed, not without   evident 
conjecture of deepe judgment.”21 Disorder must be avoided; the point, in 
other words, is to approach the physicality of combat through reason honed 
by reading. George Silver, Saviolo’s main English competitor, remarked the 
project’s difficulty by  foregrounding motion:  “The mind  of man a  greedie 
hunter after  truth, finding  the  seeming truth  but chaunging, not  alwayes 
one, but alwayes diverse, forsakes the supposed, to find out the assured cer-
taintie: and searching every where save where it should, meetes with all save 
what it would.”22 No Socrates, Silver nonetheless shares a certain skepticism 
with the ancient philosopher. 
       More  confidently than Silver, Saviolo pursues his inquiry in keen prose 
carefully tied to illustrations. The combatants appear on a grid that suggests 
geometric attention to their motion. The diagram, like the words in a dialog, 
seems to stabilize motion and permit thoughtful evaluation. In this manner, 
Saviolo scrutinizes the “cut.” An obviously dramatic maneuver, the cut adds a 
thrilling  sound to motion in ways that modern directors of action films take 
for granted. An audience can easily appreciate a cut, and an opponent must 
respect the obvious wound. Such satisfactions, however, cannot be the test of a 
movement. In order to grasp this argument, the student will want to make the 
motion answerable, fixing it in some manner, questioning it, and responding 
to it. Saviolo does precisely this when he outlines the cut in a mathematical 
diagram.23 With the aid of his  illustration, the  author explains the move’s 
limited effectiveness, numbering positions so as to better fix the represented 
motion. In the end, he concludes that the cut may satisfy the passions, but it 
will not win the combat. 
       With   this lesson and many others like it, Saviolo returns to his primary 
theme, warning his reader about motion inspired by “e-motion.” Indeed, every- 
thing in  the treatise aims at distancing the pupil from his passions. Master 
and pupil sit on a riverbank. Urging calm attention, this sage spokesman takes 
advantage of the stillness to advocate deliberate attention to speed and slow-
ness. Not unlike Socrates, Vincent encourages his young pupil to “expounde 
questions.”24 

198
                             Motion and Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet                189

       For some time now, scholars have recognized that Shakespeare and his 
contemporaries were reading these manuals. Indeed, as Joan Ozark Holmer 
explains, Saviolo’s “articulation of the ethic informing  the truly  honorable 
duello . . . significantly illuminate[s] the tragic complexity of the fatal duels 
in Romeo and Juliet.”25 What has not been fully appreciated is the way the 
manuals’ emphasis on Platonic dialectic informs the practice of questioning at 
the heart of Shakespeare’s great love story. Depending on the drama’s inquisi-
tive tradition, Shakespeare could center his love story on scenes of combat in 
order to expound questions about motion because he knew that his principal 
players were capable swordsmen. 
       Juliet   wants to   know  what  is  in   a  name. Shakespeare, in  writ-

“ ing Romeo and Juliet, might well have answered, motion. We know that 
 Romeo”  suggests  the   wandering  pilgrim;    but   long   before   Shake-
speare, Plato emphasized  the  physics of  such  a  name. In   the  Craty-
lus, Socrates muses about the  letter “r,”  suggesting that  the  great “im-
poser of names” used the letter  “because, as I imagine, he had observed 
that  the tongue  was most  agitated and  least at  rest in  the  pronuncia-

. tion of this letter,  which  he therefore  used in  order to  express motion. 
  . .”26 No mere allusion, the  name Romeo demands that  players agitate 
their tongues so as to play a part in the main character’s motion. Moreover, 
the rough  “r”  of Elizabethan  speech would  have heightened this  effect. 
There is, after all, no rest in Romeo, and so it  makes sense that his cher-
ished friend  is  named Mercutio.  As we  have already noted, the Greeks 
thought  of any change as motion.  Mercutio  embodies that  sense of the 
word as he restlessly engages his friend’s sphere of activity, even threaten-
ing to displace Romeo as the play’s real interest. 
       All  of this activity takes shape in the streets of Verona, where the play’s 
initial questioning turns on the nobility of moving versus standing. Standing, 
it turns out, is a kind of obsession in this play: the words “stand” and “stands” 
occur some 30 times. Throughout the drama, the words signal a nexus of male 
identity in combat, sexual arousal, and simple motionlessness. Sampson and 
Gregory quickly announce the theme: 

       Gre.: I strike quickly, being mov’d.
       Sam.: A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
       Gre.: To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand; therefore, if 
               thou art mov’d, thou run’st away.
       Sam.: A dog of that house shall move me to stand! (1.1.6–11) 

With  breathtaking  alacrity, Shakespeare initiates his tale of  “star-cross’d 
love” with a dialog devoted to motion. Gregory puts his faith in speed, and 

199
190                                        Daryl W. Palmer

does not doubt that he can be moved to anger. Yet he willingly abandons this 
formulation in  order to sport with  Samson’s expression of resolution. Does 
motion or  fixity   define  the valiant  man? More  clown  than philosopher, 
Samson chooses to stand even as he boasts of his desire for maidenheads: 

       Sam.: Me they shall feel while I am able to stand, and ‘tis known I 
               am a pretty piece of flesh.
       Gre.: ’Tis  well thou  art not  fish; if  thou  hadst, thou hadst been 
               poor-John. Draw thy tool,  here comes [two] of the house of 
               Montagues.”                                                        (1.1.28–32)

       That all this talk of motion evolves inevitably into talk of manhood may 
seem forced to a modern audience, and the playing of this translation on the 
stage can easily elide the way that Gregory baits Samson through these stages 
of “thought.” A pitiful imitation  of Socrates, Gregory adopts that old Platonic 

“ device of the dialog, but his instruction ends in an ambiguous validation of 
 standing.” Because of the way it merges with male sexuality, this “proof ” be-
comes an integral part of the play’s deadly orchestrations. 
       Of   course the real assay of this discourse in Romeo and Juliet (as in 
Saviolo’s treatise) will demand “swords and bucklers” (1.1.1SD). For this rea-
son, Samson’s battle cry deserves attention: “Draw, if you be men. Gregory, 
remember thy washing blow” (1.1.62–63). Primed by his  partner, Samson 
draws his “tool,” confident that he can determine his manhood by doing so. 
The caesura concretizes the character’s recognition that his manhood is linked 
to “washing blows” and other sorts of codified motion. 
       Such is the world inhabited by Romeo, Tybalt, and Mercutio, the main 
interlocutors of the play. Extensions of Samson and Gregory, these young men 
confound all attempts to tutor them. When Mercutio rhapsodizes of Queen 
Mab, Romeo tries in vain to lead him home (1.4.95). For his part, Capulet 
fruitlessly tries to teach Tybalt about hospitality (1.5.76–81). Benvolio fails 
to lead Mercutio out of the hot day (3.1.1). This list goes on and on, leaving 
Shakespeare’s audience with real doubts about the possibility of successful 
pedagogy and utter suspicion of all attempts to make motion answerable. 
       At   the play’s beginning, Romeo and  the Friar  seem to embody the 
old Platonic model as they discuss Romeo’s new love on a “grey-ey’d morn” 
(2.3.1). Romeo propounds his notions with  an “early tongue” (32). In this 
pastoral setting, the counselor challenges his young pupil’s passion with an 
energy worthy of Socrates and Saviolo. Adopting the language of fencing 
that already permeates the play, the Friar expresses a certain self-confidence 
in his  analytical abilities: “then  here I  hit   it  right—  /  Our  Romeo  hath 
not been in bed to-night”  (41–42). In  early modern England, the study of 

200
                             Motion and Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet                191

motion seems to hinge on being able to “hit it right.” Having done so, the Fri-
ar presses on: “And art thou chang’d? Pronounce this sentence then: / Women 
may fall, when there’s no strength in men” (2.3.79–80). Galvanized by the 
sudden appearance of Romeo’s change, the teacher wants to make the motion 
answerable. He seizes on the passion with a question followed by a caesura, 
indicating the instructor’s cogitation before he attempts to fix the phenomena 
with a legalistic phrase: “Pronounce this sentence.” As in Saviolo’s dialog, this 
pastoral pedagogy ends up being about “strength in men.” 
       As  it did  in Plato’s dialog, the scene also takes shape through the old 
tension between youth and experience as the pupil attempts to come to terms 
with motion: “O  let us hence, I stand on sudden haste” (2.3.93). Romeo here 
casts himself in a comic version of the manly debate between Gregory and 
Samson. Shakespeare’s audience would have understood what Romeo meant, 
but many probably laughed at the callow bawdy and the embedded contradic-
tion. Literally, Romeo insists on haste, but his “standing” would also suggest 
an erection and/or a kind of standstill that frustrates haste. The typical pupil, 
Romeo’s passion will frustrate his execution. 
       And  what of  the Friar? His wisdom fits neatly into  the second line of 
a couplet: “Wisely and slow, they stumble that run fast” (2.3.94). In his own 
imperfect way, more Heraclitus than Socrates, Friar Lawrence tries to respond 
to this turmoil by attending to the question of speed. He urges slowness, and 
it remains his constant focus. A little later in the play, he insists on the due 
and proper speed: “Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow” (2.5.15). To be sure, 
the play’s critics have been divided over how they view the Friar’s sagacity, 
but I think  Socrates provides the perfect measure for his advice. Instead of 
knowledge, the Friar deals in perception; and this focus has the ring of com-
mon sense even though it lacks knowledge. It is worth noting that praise for 
Friar Lawrence’s mental faculties comes from the Nurse (3.3.160). 
       In  the end, the Friar is so fearful of speed that he orchestrates standstill. 
When faced with Romeo’s murder of Tybalt, he counsels waiting so “we can 
find a time”  (3.3.150). (One could contextualize the Friar’s taste for slow-
ness by pointing out that the fencing community endorsed it with its formal 
requirements for a duel alla stoccata.) Sizing up the lover’s situation, he con-
cludes, “here stands all your state” (3.3.166). How appropriate then that his 
plan for peace involves a vial of “distilling liquor” that will leave Juliet fixed, in 
a state like death (4.1.95). Frightened by motion, the Friar’s passion for fixity 
seems to poison the whole play. When Paris and Romeo each arrive at the 
Capulet tomb, they tell their men to “stand” aloof (5.3.1; 5.3.26), and the two 
lovers destroy each other. How ironic that the Friar, having discovered the 
carnage, misreads the motionless forms and abandons the sleeping Juliet. The 
Friar’s absurd reason flows through a single line: “Come go, good Juliet, I dare 
no longer stay” (5.3.159). Unable to make motion answerable, the counselor 

201
192                                        Daryl W. Palmer

is reduced to “Come go.” At the play’s end, he reckons his own part in the 
action with these words: “here I stand both to impeach and purge / Myself ” 
(5.3.226–227). 
       At   the other end of  the spectrum, Tybalt buzzes about the stage, all 
motion and little  scrutiny. Saviolo might have invoked Tybalt as the perfect 
illustration of the fighter doomed by his own passions. When Benvolio would 
part the contestants in the play’s first scene, Tybalt cries, “What, drawn and 
talk of peace?” (1.1.66–67). The very presence of the sword and buckler in 
his culture seems to truncate all dialog. Nowhere is this more apparent than 

“ at the Capulet’s ball, when the host must rage in order to get his attention: 
 What,  goodman boy? I say he shall, go to! / Am I the master here or you? 
Go to!” (1.5.77–78). In a culture of combat that  revered the role of master, 
Tybalt has no time for authority. When he announces that he goes “to speak 
to them” at the beginning of 3.1, we know that he really seeks what Mercutio 
offers, namely “a word and a blow” (3.1.40). The inherently bad pupil explains 
that, for this, “You shall find me apt enough” (3.1.41). 
       Mercutio,  by contrast, has more of the philosopher in him, and this as-
pect takes shape in terms of fencing. Unafraid of motion, he can, nonetheless, 
step back and observe. In ways no other character in the play does, Mercutio 
recollects knowledge; he understands numbers and technical terms. As the 
Queen Mab speech brilliantly shows, he has the capacity to reflect on the 
nature of motion and Shakespeare indulges him with impressive set speeches: 
“Sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck, / and then dreams he of cutting 
foreign throats, /  Of  breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades” (1.4.82–84). 
Whatever we make of Queen Mab, we may admit that she instantiates, for 
Mercutio, a deadly dreaming realm of perception where passion leads men to 
their doom. If the soldier gives into passion, we may lay the blame on Queen 
Mab. Mercutio’s auditors cannot follow such a poetical lesson. “Peace,” Romeo 
pleads, “peace, Mercutio, peace! / Thou talk’st of nothing” (1.4.95–96). We 
may hear in this complaint (and not for the only time in the play) something 
of Theaetetus: “Really, I am not sure, Socrates. I cannot even make out about 
you, whether you are stating this as something you believe or merely putting 
me to the test.” Whereas Romeo and Tybalt embody motion, Mercutio puts 
motion to the test, but his pupils always fumble over the examination. 
       Nowhere are Mercutio’s aspirations on this score more apparent than in 
2.4. The scene opens with Benvolio and Mercutio discussing the whereabouts 
of Romeo, but it  turns quickly into  a fencing lesson. Mercutio expands on 
his theme with Tybalt as his subject: “He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps 
time, distance, and proportion; he rests his minim rests, one, two and the third 
in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentle-
man of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal 
passado, the punto reverso, the hay” (2.4.20–26). Mercutio offers a complex 

202
                             Motion and Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet                193

lesson here, laden with technical vocabulary, real and invented. His reference 
to “the very first house” identifies Tybalt with both a family and a school of 
fencing. As though he were consulting Saviolo, Mercutio sets forth the terms 
that always organized a critique of fencing, namely time, distance, and pro-
portion.27 Meanwhile, words such as “passado,” “punto reverso,” and “hay” give 
the instructor the opportunity to demonstrate each technique, animating the 
pictures Saviolo made popular. Mercutio even coins the term “duellist,” a feat 
that suggests the teacher’s original mind. Yet for all of this learning and bra-
vado, Mercutio frames his lesson in the most thoughtful of ways by returning 
to the Platonic concern “with due occasion, due time, due performance.”28 For 
Plato, a life lived among perceptions would have to aim for the “right” time, 
occasion, etc. Mercutio notes (rather enviously, I think) that Tybalt embod-
ies this attention, and so finds his point “in your bosom.” In ways a modern 
audience will find difficult to follow in performance, Mercutio aims to dazzle 
his auditor with  a discourse as applicable to life as it is to fencing. A veri-
table Theaetetus, Benvolio tries to follow this brilliant account. He says, “The 
what?” (2.4.27). A better teacher would listen to his pupil’s question, perhaps 
pause to recollect the matter and begin anew. Mercutio merely presses on in 
his pedagogical fury, halting only when he sees Romeo approach. 
       At  this  point, Mercutio  spies a more intriguing pupil and commences 
a history lesson: “Laura to his lady was a kitchen wench . . . Dido a dowdy, 
Cleopatra a gipsy . . .” (39–41). When Romeo attempts to make an apology 
for having missed his friends the night before, noting that “in such a case as 
mine a man may strain courtesy,” Mercutio diagnoses Romeo’s strain: “That’s 
as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams” 
(50–51, 52–53). Mercutio believes that Romeo has so indulged in amorous 
motions that he can no longer perform the simple courtesy of a bow. Romeo 
catches on, and Mercutio declares, “Thou hast most kindly hit it” (55). In ways 
that Benvolio cannot manage, Romeo proceeds to take up this challenge; and 
the two exchange verbal hits until Mercutio cries, “Come between us, good 
Benvolio, my wits faints” (67–68). Romeo, for his part, demands more intense 
motion: “Switch and spurs, switch and spurs—or I’ll cry a match” (69–70). 
Brighter than  Benvolio, Romeo knows how to play, but he lacks a certain 
capacity for reflection. Mercutio, by contrast, has the prescience to embrace 
motion and draw away in the same instant. “Nay,” he chides Romeo, “if our 
wits run the wild-goose chase, I have done; for thou hast more of the wild 
goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five” (71–74). In 
this lively exchange, we come to understand Mercutio’s aspirations. Like the 
Friar, Mercutio wants to be a kind of pedagogue. At the same time, he envies 
Tybalt’s passion and remains too interested in the competition to drive his 
point home. Mercutio  wants to know if  he has won the verbal duel: “Was 

203
194                                        Daryl W. Palmer

I with  you there for the goose?” (74). Like the Friar, Mercutio fails. Romeo 
never learns his lesson. 
       In  fact, Mercutio’s insights into motion were probably lost on the audi-
ence members as well. As Adolph L. Soens remarked some time ago, Mercutio, 
who seems to fight by the Italian book after the English habit, identifies Ty-
balt with the “Spanish book of fence as mannered and artificial as that book 
of poetics by which Romeo makes love and sonnets.”29 Soens argues convinc-
ingly that Shakespeare’s audience would have wanted to dislike Tybalt’s brave 
manner even as they respected his technical expertise (Soens, p. 125). What 
fascinates me about this set of identifications is less their relative accuracy 
than their effectiveness in (apparently) fixing motion  in ethnic  stereotypes 
for the Elizabethan audience. Silver announces this combative agenda in his 
treatise when he complains that Englishmen “have lusted like men sicke of a 
strange ague, after the strange vices and devises of Italian, French, and Span-
ish Fencers. . . .”30 
       To his credit, Soens avoids this trap and offers a stunning description of 
motion that I quote at length in order to suggest a more formalistic apprecia-
tion for the way motion matters to Mercutio’s death. At the beginning of 3.1, 
Shakespeare envisions a hot street that ensures motion. Soens explains: 

       The  efficient  and popular Italian  fencing  of Mercutio  contrasts 
       in  posture and motion,  as well as implications with  the formal, 
       deadly, and pedantic Spanish fencing of Princox (I.v.84) Tybalt. 
       Mercutio  and  Tybalt circle  each other, Tybalt upright,  his  arm 
       outstretched, rapier and shoulder in a line, trying to keep his point 
       in  Mercutio’s face; Mercutio, crouched in stoccata, holds his rapier 
       low, by his right knee, cocked back for a thrust. Both extend their 
       daggers toward the opponent to parry  thrusts or to  beat aside a 
       threatening rapier in preparation for a thrust.

Their  motions  contrast as effectively, though  not  so absolutely, as their 
postures. Tybalt  dances to and  fro,  attempting  to  evade his  opponent, 
to catch him  off  balance and to gain angular  advantage, while Mercutio 
moves with wider steps (and both move a great deal) and rushes in a series 
of tangents to  the circle whose radius is  Tybalt’s outstretched rapier and 
sword-arm. Mercutio, in other words, rushes rapidly in and out of distance, 
hoping to catch Tybalt unprepared, and to throw a thrust from  stoccata or 
imbroccata (in which the sword is held, knuckles up, over the head) while 
Tybalt is both  off balance and within  distance. Both  parry with  the dag-
ger as a rule, although  stop thrusts combined with   parries can be found 
in both the Italian  and Spanish manuals. The difference in styles suggests 
the mechanics of Mercutio’s death. Mercutio takes his fatal thrust,  not by 

204
                             Motion and Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet                195

accident, but in  a situation  where the advantage is all  with  the  Spanish 
style . . . (Soens, p. 126). 
       In  ways that no other scholar has done for this scene, Soens helps us to 
grasp Mercutio’s death as a matter of contrasting motions. For Soens, this 
difference is the point: Romeo’s intervention puts Mercutio’s fighting style at 
a disadvantage. More compelling still is Romeo’s well-meaning yet clumsy at-
tempt to bring all this complex motion to a standstill in the name of “reason” 
(3.1.62, 70). In Platonic  terms, reason would be precisely what these men 
need, but Romeo is talking about “reason” colloquially as “cause,” specifically 
his marriage to Juliet (Holmer,  p. 182). Romeo wants to stop the motion, 
but lacks the reason to do so. For Holmer, this confrontation recalls Savio-
lo’s condemnation of ill-considered quarrels spurred on by fury (Holmer, pp. 
181–185). 
       Just as important,  I  contend, is Saviolo’s pragmatic recognition that 
some of the most compromised of motions, say combats between friends and 
kin, do not permit  analysis. For the teacher who longs for truth and justice 
in quarreling, certain situations nonetheless demand an end to thought. In a 
description that seems to anticipate the conflict in Romeo and Juliet, Saviolo 
urges his pupil to abandon reflection: 

       consider that  he  which challengeth  him,  dooth  not require  to 
       fight  with  him as a freend, but as an enemye, and that he is not to 
       think  any otherwise of his minde but as full of rancour and malice 
       towards him:  wherefore when you see one with  weapons in his 
       hand that will  needs fight with you, although hee were your freend 
       or kinseman, take him for an enemy. . . . 31

Saviolo’s account neatly exposes Romeo’s error. Faced with such a predica-

“ ment, Romeo appeals to the “minde” and encourages Tybalt and Mercutio 
(to think  any otherwise,” contrary to Saviolo’s advice. As Holmer has noted 
 Holmer, p. 174), Mercutio’s dying words come straight from Saviolo: “They 
have made worms’ meat of me”  (3.1.107). Only when  it  is too  late does 
Romeo grasp at the master’s injunction: “take him for an enemy.” 
       Even as Shakespeare offers his audience a veritable laboratory of fencing 
mechanics and the geometric spectacle of Mercutio’s death, the playwright 
spins out a mechanics of catastrophe that cannot satisfy the rational mind. 
Romeo’s teacher sends “a friar with speed,” but the messenger arrives too 
late (4.1.123). Romeo chooses “quick” drugs that enable him to die before 
Friar Lawrence arrives and Juliet awakes. A moment too late, Friar  Law-
rence exclaims, “how oft tonight  /  Have my old  feet stumbled at  graves!” 
(5.3.121–122). In time to see that the “lady stirs,” the counselor determines 
he can “no longer stay” (5.3.147, 59). If we step back from this action, I think 

205
196                                        Daryl W. Palmer

we can describe this early tragedy anew: Shakespeare has created a work that 
teases us with the possibility of making motion answerable. Who can watch 
such motions and not demand an inquiry? Yet with Mercutio dead, who will 
expound the questions? 
       For  centuries, audiences have been mesmerized by the character that 
inspired Coleridge to write the following encomium: 

       O!  how shall I  describe that exquisite ebullience and overflow of 
       youthful  life,  wafted on over the laughing waves of pleasure and 
       prosperity, as a wanton beauty that distorts the face on which she 
       knows her lover is gazing enraptured, and wrinkles her forehead in 
       the  triumph of its  smoothness! Wit ever wakeful, fancy busy and 
       procreative as an insect, courage, an easy mind that, without cares 
       of  its own, is at once disposed to laugh away those of others, and 
       yet to be interested in them. . . . 32


Generations of readers have agreed with this appraisal, but what we have 
failed to appreciate is the pedagogical (and therefore interrogative) motive 
behind all this  “exquisite ebullience.” When Plato bequeathed his brilliant 
dialogs to posterity, he left behind more than questioning: the philosopher 
left us with  the idea of  the brilliant  teacher whose radiance would always 
authenticate the asking. This is precisely the role Socrates gives to himself 
in the Theaetetus: “And the highest point of  my art  is the power to prove 
by every test whether  the offspring  of  a young  man’s thought is  a false 
phantom or instinct with  life  and truth”  (Thea, 150c). For a dramatist like 
Shakespeare, the old conversation about motion must have held all sorts of 
attractions, but the implications  for character must have been tantalizing. 
Aspiring to both embody motion and test it, Mercutio longs to be the young 
man’s guide: he is the obvious product of Shakespeare’s musing over motion, 
on the page, on the stage. Although his lessons never approach the rigor of 
Socrates, his “wit ever wakeful” energizes audiences with ambitions worthy 
of the ancient Greeks. Were we able to make motion answerable, we would 
be very close to the origins of life itself. Mercutio  aspires in this direction. 
Perhaps Romeo and Juliet feels so profound because we experience this aspi-
ration and mourn its failure. 

                                                   Notes 
        1. George Silver, Paradoxes of Defence (London, 1599), A3r, v. 
        2. The author would like to thank Jose Ramón Díaz-Fernández and Peter S. 
Donaldson for organizing A Boundless Sea: Shakespeare’s Mediterranean on Film at the 
Seventh World Shakespeare Congress in Valencia, Spain, where the initial version 

206
                                Motion  and Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet                        197

of this essay was presented. And special thanks to my colleague in philosophy Alan 
Hart for  his wise reading of the work in progress. 
           3. Madeleine  Doran, Endeavors of Art (Madison:  University of  Wisconsin 
Press, 1954), p. 312. 
           4. Joel B. Altman, The Tudor Play of Mind (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1978), p. 6. 
           5. Altman,  The Tudor Play of Mind, p. 21. 
           6. William  Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, The Riverside Shakespeare, 2nd ed., 
ed. G. Blakemore Evans (New York: Houghton Mifflin,   1997), 2.2.43. 
           7. Stanley Cavell, Disowning Knowledge, updated ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003), p. 2. 
           8. Plato, Theaetetus, The Collected Dialogues of Plato, ed. Edith Hamilton and 
Huntington  Cairns  (Princeton: Princeton University  Press, 1961), 156a; hereafter 
abbreviated Thea. 
           9. Heraclitus, The Presocratics, ed. Philip Wheelwright (New York: Odyssey 
Press, 1966), p. 71. 
         10. Heraclitus, The Presocratics, p. 70. 
         11. Protagoras, The Presocratics, p. 239. 

( 12.        See, for instance, Jacques Derrida, Disseminations, trans. Barbara Johnson 
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp. 65–84. 
         13. On  this fundamental distinction  between perception and knowledge, see 
(Gail J. Fine, “Knowledge and LOGOS in  the Theaetetus,” Philosophical Review 88 
 1979): 366–397. 
         14. Paul Oskar Kristeller, “Humanism,”  The Cambridge History of Renaissance 
Philosophy, ed. Charles B. Schmitt, et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1988), p. 129. 
         15. Paul  F. Grendler, “Printing   and Censorship,” The Cambridge History of 
Renaissance Philosophy, p. 42. 
         16. Sears Jayne, Plato in Renaissance England (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1995), p. xiii. 
         17. Melissa Lane, Plato’s Progeny (London: Duckworth, 2001), p. 9. 
         18. J. D. Aylward,  The English Master of Arms (London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, 1956), pp. 17–31. 
         19. Andrew  Gurr,  The Shakespearean Stage 1574–1642, 3rd ed. (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992), p. 4. 
         20. Vincentio Saviolo, Vincentio Saviolo His Practice (London, 1595), I4r. 
         21. Giacomo  Grassi,  DiGrassi  His  True  Arte  of Defence, trans.  Thomas 
Churchyard (London, 1594), A2r. 
         22. Silver, Paradoxes of Defence, A3v. 
         23. Aylward, The English Master of Arms, p. 58. 
         24. Saviolo, Vincentio Saviolo His Practice, B4v. 
         25. Joan Ozark  Holmer,  “‘Draw,  if  you be Men’: Saviolo’s Significance for 
Romeo and Juliet,” Shakespeare Quarterly 45 (1994): 163;  hereafter abbreviated 
Holmer. 
         26. Plato, Cratylus, 426 d, e. 
         27. On Mercutio’s “debt” to  Saviolo, see Holmer, p. 173. 
         28. Plato, Statesman, 284e. 
         29. Adolph   L.   Soens, “Tybalt’s   Spanish Fencing   in  Romeo and  Juliet,” 
Shakespeare Quarterly 20 (1969): 121, 123–125; hereafter abbreviated Soens. 

207
198                                              Daryl W. Palmer

         30. Silver, Paradoxes of Defence, A4v. 
         31. Saviolo, Vincentio Saviolo His Practice, E2r, v. On Saviolo’s recommendation 
not to part combatants, see Holmer, p. 183. 

( 32.        Samuel Taylor Coleridge, The Romantics on Shakespeare, ed. Jonathan Bate 
 London: Penguin, 1992), p. 515.

208
                                                   Chronology








1564                    William     Shakespeare christened   at   Stratford-on-Avon    on 
                            April   26.
1582                    Marries  Anne  Hathaway  in November.
1583                    Daughter  Susanna born, baptized on  May 26.
1585                    Twins  Hamnet  and Judith  born, baptized  on February 2.
1587                    Shakespeare goes to London, without   family. 
1589–1590          Henry VI,  Part  One.
1590–1591          Henry VI,  Part  Two; Henry VI,  Part Three. 
1592–1593          Richard III;   The Two Gentlemen of Verona.
1592–1593          Publication   of   Venus and Adonis,  dedicated  to  the  Earl   of 
                            Southampton;  The Sonnets probably begun.
1593                    The Comedy of Errors.
1593–1594          Publication   of The Rape of Lucrece, also dedicated to the Earl 
                            of  Southampton;  Titus Andronicus; The Taming of the Shrew.
1594–1595          Love’s Labour’s Lost; King John; Richard II.
1595–1596          Romeo and Juliet; A Midsummer Night’s Dream.
1596                    Son  Hamnet   dies; a  coat  of  arms granted  to  Shakespeare’s 
                            father,  John.



                                                             199

209
200                                                 Chronology

1596–1597          The  Merchant of Venice; Henry IV,  Part  One; purchases New 
                            Place in  Stratford.
1597–1598          The Merry  Wives of Windsor; Henry IV Part Two.
1598–1599          Much Ado About Nothing.
1599                    Henry V; Julius Cesar; As You Like It.
1600–1601          Hamlet.
1601                    The Phoenix and the Turtle; Shakespeare’s father dies.
1601–1602          Twelfth  Night; Troilus and Cressida. 
1602–1603          All’s Well That  Ends Well.
1603                    Death   of  Queen  Elizabeth;  James VI   of  Scotland  becomes 
                            James I   of  England;   Shakespeare’s Company  becomes the 
                            King’s  Men.
1604                    Measure for Measure; Othello.
1605                    King  Lear.
1606                    Macbeth; Antony and Cleopatra.
1607                    Marriage  of  daughter Susanna on June 5. 
1607–1608          Coriolanus; Timon of Athens; Pericles.
1608                    Death  of Shakespeare’s mother.
1609                    Publication,   probably  unauthorized,  of  the quarto  edition   of 
                            the  Sonnets.
1609–1610          Cymbeline. 
1610–1611          The Winter’s Tale.
1611                    The  Tempest; Shakespeare  returns   to  Stratford,    where  he 
                            will   live  until  his  death.
1612                    A  Funeral Elegy.
1612–1613          Henry  VIII;   The  Globe  Theatre   destroyed by  fire. 
1613                    The Two  Noble Kinsmen (with   John Fletcher).
1616                    Marriage   of  daughter  Judith   on  February  10;  Shakespeare 
                            dies  on April   23.
1623                    Publication     of  the   First    Folio   edition    of   Shakespeare’s 
                            plays.

210
                                            Contributors







HAROLD   BLOOM   is Sterling  Professor of the Humanities at Yale Uni-
versity. He is the author of 30 books, including Shelley’s Mythmaking (1959), 
The Visionary Company (1961), Blake’s Apocalypse (1963), Yeats (1970), A Map 
of Misreading (1975), Kabbalah and Criticism (1975), Agon: Toward a Theory of 
Revisionism (1982), The American Religion (1992), The Western Canon (1994), 

( and Omens of Millennium: The Gnosis of Angels, Dreams, and Resurrection 
 1996). The Anxiety of Influence (1973) sets forth Professor Bloom’s provoca-
tive theory of the literary  relationships between the great writers and their 
predecessors. His most recent books include Shakespeare: The Invention of the 

( Human (1998), a 1998 National Book Award finalist; How to Read and Why 
 2000); Genius: A Mosaic of One Hundred Exemplary Creative Minds (2002); 
Hamlet: Poem Unlimited (2003);  Where Shall Wisdom Be Found? (2004); 
and Jesus and Yahweh: The Names Divine (2005). In 1999, Professor Bloom 
received the prestigious American Academy of Arts and Letters Gold Medal 
for Criticism. He  has also received the International Prize of Catalonia, the 
Alfonso Reyes Prize of Mexico, and the Hans Christian Andersen Bicenten-
nial Prize of Denmark.
NORMAN     F.  BLAKE    is  a research professor in the  English  depart-
ment and Centre for Technology and the Arts  at De Montfort   University, 
Leicester, U.K. He has published widely, focusing on Chaucer, especially the 
Canterbury Tales Project, William  Caxton and  the relation of  printing  to 
the development of standard English, and the language of Shakespeare. His 
recent books include A History of the English Language (1996) and A Grammar 
of Shakespeare’s Language (2002).


                                                       201

211
202                                           Contributors

TANYA   POLLARD    is associate professor of English at Brooklyn College. 
She wrote Drugs and Theater in Early Modern England (2005) and edited 
Shakespeare’s Theater: A Sourcebook (2003).
DAVID    SALTER   is  lecturer in   English literature  at  the University  of 
Edinburgh.  He  wrote Holy  and Noble Beasts: Encounters with Animals in 
Medieval Literature (2001).
WILLIAM      M.   MCKIM     is a retired  professor of English  at Northern 
Kentucky University. He has written articles on Shakespeare; Spenser; Base-
ball, Religion, and American Culture; and the poetics of aging.
ROBERT  N.  WATSON   is former chair of the department of English and 
chair of the faculty of the University of California at Los Angeles College of 
Letters and Science, and is now associate vice-provost for Educational Inno-
vation. His  books include Shakespeare and the Hazards of Ambition (1984), 
Ben Jonson’s Parodic Strategy: Literary Imperialism in the Comedies (1987), Back 

( to Nature, The Rest Is Silence: Death as Annihilation in the English Renaissance 
 1995), and The Green and the Real in the Late Renaissance (2006).
STEPHEN   DICKEY   is senior lecturer in English at UCLA.  He has writ-
ten articles on Elizabethan drama.
JENNIFER   A.  LOW   is associate professor of English at Florida Atlantic 
University. She wrote Manhood and the Duel: Masculinity in Early Modern 
Drama and Culture (2003).
LINA    PERKINS    WILDER    is  assistant professor of English  at  Con-

“ necticut College, where she teaches courses on Shakespeare, Milton, and the 
 early modern” period of English literature. 
THOMAS    HONEGGER     is professor of English philology with  special 
consideration of  medieval  studies  at  Freidrich-Schiller-Universität-Jena, 
Germany. He has written  From Phoenix To Chauntecleer: Medieval English 
Animal Poetry (1996) and has edited books both on medieval language and 
literature and on Tolkein.
DARYL   W.  PALMER    is associate professor of English at Regis Univer-
sity. He is the author of Hospitable Performances: Dramatic Genre and Cultural 
Practices in Early Modern England (1992) and Writing Russia in the Age of 
Shakespeare (2004).

212
                                                 Bibliography








Abbate, Alessandro. “The  Text  within   the Text,  the  Screen within  the  Screen: 
         Multi-Layered   Representations in  Michael   Almereyda’s Hamlet  and  Baz 
         Luhrmann’s Romeo + Juliet.” In Gerhard Fischer and Bernhard Greiner, eds. 
         The Play within the Play: The Performance of Meta-Theatre and Self-Reflection. 
         Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi, 2007, pp. 377–391.

         ( Adams, Barry B. “The Prudence of Prince Escalus.” English Literary History 35 
          1968): 32–50.
Andreas, James. “The  Neutering  of  Romeo and Juliet.” In  Ideological Approaches 
         to Shakespeare: The Practice of Theory, ed. Robert P. Merrix. Lewiston, NY: 
         Edwin  Mellen Press, 1992.
Andrews, J. F. (ed.). Romeo and Juliet: Critical Essays. New York: Garland, 1993. 
Belsey, Catherine. “The Name of the Rose in Romeo and Juliet.” Yearbook of English 
         Studies 23 (1993): 125–142.
Black, James. “The Visual  Artistry   of Romeo and Juliet.” SEL: Studies in English 
         Literature, 1500–1900 15 (1975): 245–256.
Bond, Ronald B. “Love  and Lust in  Romeo and Juliet.” Wascana Review 15 (1980): 
         22–31.

         ( Bryant, James C. “The Problematic Friar in Romeo and Juliet.” English Studies 55 
          1974): 340–350.
Carroll, William   T. “‘We Were Born to Die’: Romeo and Juliet.” Comparative Drama 
         15 (1981): 54–71.
Chang, Joseph S. M. J. “The Language of Paradox in Romeo and Juliet.” Shakespeare 
         Studies 3 (1967): 22–42.
Cribb, T. J. “The Unity  of Romeo and Juliet.” Shakespeare Survey 34 (1981): 93–104. 


                                                             203

213
204                                                Bibliography

Dickey, Franklin   M.   Not Wisely But  Too Well: Shakespeare’s Love Tragedies. San 
         Marino,  California:  Huntington  Library  Press, 1957.
Estrin,  Barbara. “Romeo and Juliet, and the Art of Naming Love.”  Ariel 12 (April 
         1981): 31–49.
Evans, Bertrand. “The Brevity of Friar  Laurence.” PMLA 65 (1950): 841–865.
Evans, Blakemore G. Introduction to Romeo and Juliet, by William Shakespeare, ed. 
         G. Blakemore Evans. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
Everett, Barbara. “Romeo and Juliet: the Nurse’s Story.” Critical Quarterly 14 (1972): 
         169–182.
Faber, M. D.  “The  Adolescent Suicide of Romeo and Juliet.” Psychoanalytic Review 
         59 (1972): 169–182.
Farrell, Kirby.  “Love,  Death, and Patriarchy in  Romeo and Juliet.” In Shakespeare’s 
         Personality, ed. Norman N.  Holland,  Sidney Homan, and  Bernard J. Paris. 
         Berkeley: University of California  Press, 1989.
García Mainar, Luis. “Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet and Male Melodrama.” In José 
         Manuel  González, ed. Spanish Studies in Shakespeare and His Contemporaries. 
         International Studies in Shakespeare and His Contemporaries. Newark: University 
         of Delaware Press, 2006, pp. 148–170.
Gibbons, Brian.  Introduction   to  Romeo and Juliet, by William  Shakespeare, ed. 
         Brian  Gibbons. The New  Arden Shakespeare, ed. Harold F. Brooks, Harold 
         Jenkins, and Brian Morris. London  and New York: Methuen, 1980.
Gregory, Sue. “Making Shakespeare Our Contemporary: Teaching Romeo and Juliet 
         at  Key Stage Three.”  In  Martin   Blocksidge,  ed. Shakespeare in Education. 
         London:  Continuum, 2005, pp. 20–39.
Hanson,  Kristin.   “Shakespeare’s Lyric  and  Dramatic   Metrical   Styles.”  In   B. 
         Elan  Dresher and  Nila  Friedberg, eds. Formal Approaches to Poetry: Recent 
         Development in Metrics. Berlin,  Germany:  Mouton  de  Gruyter,  2006,  pp. 
         111–133.
Hodgdon,  Barbara, and  W.  B.  Worthen,  eds.  A Companion to Shakespeare and 
         Performance. Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Oxford, England: 
         Blackwell, 2005. 
Holmer, Joan Ozark. “‘Myself  Condemned and Myself  Excus’d’: Tragic Effect  in 
         Romeo and Juliet.” Studies in Philology 88 (1991): 345–362.
Kahn, Coppelia.  “Coming  of Age  in  Verona.” Modern Language Studies 8 (1977–
         1978): 5–22.
Leech, Clifford.   “The   Moral  Tragedy  of Romeo and Juliet.” English Renaissance 
         Drama:  Essays in Honor  of Madeleine Doran  and  Mark  Eccles. Henning, 
         Standish,  et   al.,  eds.  Carbondale  and  Edwardsville:   Southern   Illinois 
         University Press, London and Amsterdam: Feffer and Simons: 1976.
Levenson, Jill L.  “The  Definition   of Love:  Shakespeare’s Phrasing in Romeo and 
         Juliet.” Shakespeare’s Studies 15 (1982): 21–36.

214
                                                      Bibliography                                                 205

Levin, Harry.  “Form  and Formality  in  Romeo and Juliet.” Shakespeare Quarterly 10 
         (1959): 35–44.
Mahood, M.  M.   “Romeo and Juliet.” In Shakespeare’s Wordplay. London: Methuen, 
         1957.
Marsh,  Derick  R.  C.  Passion Lends Them Power: A Study of Shakespeare’s Love 
         Tragedies. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1976.
Mason, Harold A.  Shakespeare’s Tragedies of Love. 1970.
Moisan, Thomas E. “Rhetoric and Rehearsal of Death: the ‘Lamentations’ Scene in 
         Romeo and Juliet.” Shakespeare Quarterly 34 (1983): 389–404.
Moore, Olin  H.  The Legend of Romeo and Juliet. Columbus: Ohio State University 
         Press, 1950.
Ostrovsky, Arkady. “Shakespeare as a Founding Father of Socialist Realism: The 
         Soviet Affair  with  Shakespeare.” In Irena R. Makaryk, and Joseph G. Price, 
         eds. Shakespeare in the Worlds of Communism and Socialism. Toronto: University 
         of Toronto Press, 2006, pp. 56–83.
Parker, Douglas H. “Light and Dark Imagery in Romeo and Juliet.” Queen’s Quarterly 
         75 (1968): 663–674.
Porter, Joseph A.   Shakespeare’s Mercutio: His History and Drama. Chapel Hill: 
         University of North  Carolina  Press, 1988.
Reynolds, Bryan,  and Janna Segal. “Fugitive   Explorations in   Romeo and Juliet: 
         Searching for  Transversality inside the  Goldmine  of  R&Jspace.” In Bryan 
         Reynolds  and Bruce  Smith,   eds. Transversal Enterprises in the Drama of 
         Shakespeare and His Contemporaries: Fugitive Explorations. New York: Palgrave 
         Macmillan,  2006, pp. 124–167.
Riethmüller, Albrecht.  “‘She Speaks, Yet She Says Nothing: What of That?’ Romeo 
         and  Juliet in   Hector  Berlioz’s  and  Leonard  Bernstein’s Adaptations.”  In 
         Christa Jansohn, ed. German Shakespeare Studies at the Turn of the Twenty-First 
         Century. International Studies in Shakespeare and His Contemporaries. Newark: 
         University of Delaware Press, 2006, pp. 128–143.
Roe, John. “Unfinished Business: A Lover’s Complaint and Hamlet, Romeo and Juliet 
         and The Rape of Lucrece.” In Shirley Sharon-Zisser and Stephen Whitworth, 
         eds. Critical  Essays on Shakespeare’s A Lover’s Complaint: Suffering Ecstasy. 
         Aldershot, England:  Ashgate, 2006, pp. 109–120.
Ryan, Kiernan. “Romeo and Juliet: the Language of Tragedy.” In The Taming of the 
         Text: Explorations in Language, Literature and Culture, ed. Willie  van  Peer. 
         London:  Routledge, 1988, pp. 106–121.
Scragg, Leah.  Shakespeare’s Mouldy Tales: Recurrent Plot Motifs in Shakespearean 
         Drama. London:  Longman, 1992.
Seward, James H. Tragic Vision in Romeo and Juliet. Washington, D.C.: Consortium 
         Press, 1973.

215
206                                                Bibliography

Siegal, Paul  N.  “Christianity    and the  Religion   of  Love  in  Romeo and Juliet.” 
         Shakespeare Quarterly 12 (1961): 371–392.
Soncini, Sara. “Re-Locating Shakespeare: Cultural Negotiations in Italian Dubbed 
         Versions of  Romeo and Juliet.” In  Manfred  Pfister,  and  Ralf  Hertel,  eds. 
         Performing National Identity: Anglo-Italian Cultural Transactions. Amsterdam, 
         Netherlands: Rodopi, 2008, pp. 235–248.
Stamm, Rudolf.  “The  First  Meeting   of the  Lovers  in  Shakespeare’s Romeo and 
         Juliet.” English Studies 67 (1986): 2–13.
Thomas, Sidney. “The Queen Mab Speech in Romeo and Juliet.” Shakespeare Survey 
         25 (1972): 73–80.

         ( Utterback, Raymond V. “The Death of Mercutio.” Shakespeare Quarterly 24, No. 2 
          Spring 1973): 105–116.
Wall, Wendy. “De-Generation: Editions,  Offspring,  and Romeo and Juliet.” In Peter 
         Holland  and Stephen Orgel,  eds. From Performance to Print in Shakespeare’s 
         England. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006, pp. 152–170.
Wallace, Nathaniel. “Cultural   Tropology in  Romeo and Juliet.” Studies in Philology 
         88 (1991): 329–344.
Waters, Douglas. Christian Settings in Shakespeare’s Tragedies. London: Associated 
         University Presses, 1994.
Watts, Cedric. Romeo and Juliet. Boston: Twayne, 1991.
West,  William   N.   “Mercutio’s  Bad  Language.” Bryan   Reynolds and  William 
         N.  West,  eds. Rematerializing Shakespeare: Authority and Representation on 
         the Early Modern English Stage. New York: Palgrave Macmillan,  2005,  pp. 
         115–129.
Williamson,   Marilyn    L.   “Romeo  and  Death.”   Shakespeare Studies 14 (1981): 
         129–137.
Young, Bruce W.  “Haste,  Consent, and Age  at Marriage:  Some Implications  of 
         Social History  in  Romeo and Juliet.” Iowa State Journal of Research 62 (1988): 
         459–474.

216
                                           Acknowledgments








Norman  F. Blake. “On   Shakespeare’s Informal Language,”  Journal of Historical 
Pragmatics, Volume 3, Number 2 (2002):  pp. 179–204. Copyright   ©  2002 John 
Benjamin Publishing  Company.  Reprinted  by permission of  the publisher.

Tanya Pollard.  “‘A Thing   Like  Death’:  Sleeping Potions  and Poisons in Romeo 
and Juliet and  Antony  and Cleopatra,” Renaissance Drama, Volume 32  (2003): 
pp. 95–121.  Copyright   ©  2003  Northwestern  University   Press. Reprinted  by 
permission of the publisher  and the author.

David  Salter.   “Shakespeare and  Catholicism:   The   Franciscan  Connection,” 
Cahiers Élisabéthains: Late Medieval and Renaissance Studies, Volume 66 (Autumn 
2004): pp.  9–22. Copyright   ©  2004  David  Salter. Reprinted  by  permission of 
the author.

William    M.   McKim.    “Romeo’s   ‘Death-markt’    Imagination   and   its  Tragic 
Consequences,” Kentucky Philological Review, Volume 20, Numbers 4–5 (March 
2005):  pp.   38–45.  Copyright    ©   2005   Kentucky   Philological    Association. 
Reprinted by permission  of the publisher.

Robert N.  Watson and Stephen Dickey. “Wherefore  Art  Thou  Tereu? Juliet and 
the Legacy of Rape,” Renaissance Quarterly, Volume 58, Number 1 (Spring 2005): 
pp. 127–156. Copyright   ©  2005  Northwestern  University  Press. Reprinted  by 
permission of the publisher  and the authors.




                                                             207

217
208                                           Acknowledgments

Jennifer A.   Low.   “‘Bodied  Forth’:   Spectator,  Stage, and  Actor   in  the  Early 
Modern  Theater,”  Comparative Drama,  Volume  39, Number  1  (Spring  2005): 
pp.  1–29.  Copyright   ©   2005   Western  Michigan    University.   Reprinted   by 
permission of the publisher  and the author.

Lina Perkins  Wilder.  “Toward  a Shakespearean ‘Memory Theater’:  Romeo, the 
Apothecary,  and the  Performance  of Memory,”   Shakespeare Quarterly, Volume 
56, Number   2  (Summer  2005):  pp.  156–175. Copyright   ©   2005  The  Johns 
Hopkins  University   Press. Reprinted  by  permission  of  the  publisher  and the 
author.

Thomas   Honegger.   “‘Wouldst     thou   withdraw    love’s  faithful     vow?’  The 
Negotiation  of  Love  in  the Orchard   Scene (Romeo and Juliet Act II),”   Journal 
of Historical  Pragmatics, Volume  7, Number   1  (2006):  pp.  73–88.  Copyright 
©  2006 John Benjamin   Publishing  Company.  Reprinted  by permission  of  the 
publisher and the author.

Daryl  W.  Palmer.  “Motion   and Mercutio   in  Romeo and Juliet,” Philosophy and 
Literature,  Volume  30,  Number   2  (October  2006):   pp.  540–554.  Copyright 
©  2006 The  Johns Hopkins   University  Press. Reprinted  by permission  of  the 
publisher and the author.

218
                                                         Index



Actaeon, 92                                                 Athlone  Press, 5
Actium,  44                                                  Austria
Adam (character), 14, 84                                 Vienna,  71
Adonis (character), 6                                   Aylward,  J. D., 187
Aeneas (character), 95–96, 109
Agamemnon (character), 104                     Bain,  A.  D., 127
Agrippa  (character), 43                              Bal,  Mieke,  111
Aguecheek, Sir Andrew   (character),         Bale, John, 62

“ 20                                                              Balthasar (character), 106
 Air  and Angels,”  110                                Bandello,  Matteo,  64,  68
Alberto,  Frate (character), 63                     Barabas (character), 37
Alchemist, The, 107                                    Barnes, Barnabe, 93
All’s Well That Ends Well, 24                      Barrough,  Philip,  38
Altman,  Joel B., 185                                   Bartholomew Fair, 92, 107
A Midsummer Night’s Dream, 39,               Bassianus (character), 103
    100,  104, 112                                         Beatrice (character), 93
Angelo (character), 26, 70–71                    Belsey, Catherine,  125–126, 140
Anglican  Church,  59                                  Bembo, Peter (character), 171
Annabella (character), 128–129,                 Benvolio (character), 30, 82,  172, 
    131–133                                                       190, 192–193
Antony, Marc  (character), 16, 41,              Bergetto  (character), 130
    43–48,  129, 162                                     Berowne (character), 84
Antony and Cleopatra, 29, 41, 49, 129 Bevington,        David,  39
Appelbaum, Robert,  108                            Bibliopola, 154
Appenine Mountains,   63                           Blackfriars,  122
Aristotle,  30                                                Bloom,  Molly  (character), 113
Armado  (character), 20, 25                        Boccaccio, 63
Ars Amatoria, 94                                         Bolzoni,  Lina,   149, 151
Artaudian  Theatre  of Cruelty,  133 Book           of the Courtier, The, 169, 179
As You Like It, 14, 24, 87                            Böschenbröker, Rita,  180
Atheist’s Tragedie, The, 104                       Bottom  (character), 21, 100

                                                             209

219
210                                                      Index

Bourdieu, Pierre,  128                                 Chapman,  George, 122
Bovicida, 154                                              Chappuis,  Gabriel,  162
Bright,  Timothy,  38                                    Charmian  (character), 48
Brockbank,  Philip,  136                              Chaucer, Geoffrey,  55–56, 112
Brooke, Arthur,   64, 66, 92,  95, 98,           Chettle,  Henry,  103
    101, 104–105, 169, 171, 173, 178 Chettle,           Thomas,  7
Brooke, Nicholas,  179                                Chorus,  37, 152
Bullein’s Bulwarke of Defence, 38              Christ,   Jesus, 22, 60
Bullough,  Geoffrey, 66,  69                        Cibber,  Theophilus,  104
Bussy D’Ambois, 121, 124                          Clarence (character), 20
                                                                    Claudio  (character), 26, 68–69, 71
Caesar (character), 43, 45, 48                    Cleopatra  (character), 16, 41–48, 
Caliban (character), 40,  112, 148,                  148, 153, 162,  193
    153, 162                                                  Clifford   (character), 16
Callaghan, Dympna  C.,  173                      Cloten  (character), 11
Callisto  (character), 93                               Clown  (character), 20
Cambridge University,  56                           Coke, Edward,  93
Camillo,  Giulio,   149, 151, 162                  Coleridge,  Samuel Taylor, 83
Campaspe, 100                                           Combat of Love and Friendship, The, 
Campbell, Joseph, 68                                      103
Canterbury Tales, The, 21                          Continuum   Books, 5
Capelletti  family,  64                                   Corin  (character), 24
Capuchin Order,  62                                    Corinth,  10
Capulet family  (characters), 64, 79,           Coriolanus, 24, 136, 139
    92,  99, 124, 169                                     Costard  (character), 17
     Capulet, Lady (character), 82, 154 Cratylus,        189
     Capulet, Lord  (character), 102–104 Cressida      (character), 109
     Capulet, Old (character), 26                   Cydnus, 43–44,  48, 148, 153
     ball, 83, 101, 192                                   Cymbeline  (character), 11
     tomb, 106, 191                                       Cymbeline, 38, 100
Carew, Thomas, 102
Carlyle, Thomas,  59                                   D’Ambois,  Bussy (character), 121–
Carpenter, C.  R., 127                                      122
Carruthers, Mary   J., 149, 154, 159 Danae           (character), 93
Casey, Edward S., 139                               Day,  John, 38
Castiglione, Baldassare, 169, 179              Decameron, 63
Castle of Perseverance, The, 125              De  Flores (character), 93
Catholic  Church,  22, 55, 58, 66–67,         Deianeira  (character), 46
    72                                                            Dekker  (character), 22
Catholicism,  55–72                                    Dekker,  Thomas,  38
Cavell, Stanley, 186                                    Demeter,  102
Celestial Worlds, The, 162                          Derrida,  Jacques, 30
Changeling, The, 93, 107                            Descartes, Rene, 126

220
                                                            Index                                                      211

Diana, 92                                                     Eve (character), 84
Dido  (character), 96, 104, 109                   “Eve  of St. Agnes,  The,” 100
Diehl,  Huston,  140
Diomedes (character), 46                           Fabian  (character), 25
Dis (character), 84, 106                              Falstaff  (character), 18–19, 148, 162
Doctor Faustus, 62, 93                                Faustus (character), 62
Dogberry  (character), 8, 20                        female genitalia,  124
Dolabella (character), 46                             fencing, 95, 188
Donne, John, 110, 129, 132                        Ferdinand (character), 101
Doran, Madeleine,  185                               Fernando, 107
Dream of Innocent III, The (fresco),            Feste (character), 20
    60                                                            Fleet Street,  57
Duchess of Malfi, The, 140                         Fleire, The, 38
Duke of  Austria  (character), 18                 Florizel  (character), 101
Du Laurens,  André,  38                              Fludd,  Robert, 149, 151
Duncan (character), 40                               Ford,  John, 107, 128–129, 132
Dunk,  Eleazer, 38                                      Ford,  Mr.  (character), 18
Dunsinane, 23                                             Fortune  Theater, 134
                                                                    Foxe, John, 57
earthquake, 154, 159                                  France, 17
Ecclesiastical History, 57                            Francesco, Duke  of Florence 
Edgar (character), 25                                       (character), 62

“ Egypt, 41, 43–44, 46                                 Francis, Friar  (character), 68, 70–72
 Elinda’s Glove,”  94                                    Franciscan Order,  55, 57, 59–62, 66, 
Elizabethan  period, 5, 23                                71–72
Emilia  (character), 18                                 Francis of Assisi,  63
Empedocles, 186                                        Freud,  Sigmund, 95, 124
England, 55                                                 Frye, Northrop,   68, 70, 80
     Lancashire, 59                                       Fulgens and Lucres, 185
     London, 58, 150, 177, 187                     Fulwood,  William,   154
                                                                    Fumerton,  Patricia,  130
     pharmacy in, 30
England’s Mourning Garment, 103 Gabriel,              Angel  (character), 63
English Master of Arms, The, 187               Gadshill  (character), 25
English Reformation,   57                            Garber, Marjorie,   36
Enobarbus (character), 16, 43–44,             Gaskell,  Philip,  7
    148                                                          Giotto,  60
Epicoene, 92                                               Giovanni  (character), 129, 130–133
Erasmus of Rotterdam,  151, 162               Giulietta   (character), 64
Euripides (character), 104                           Globe Theater,  134, 152
Europa (character), 93                                Gloucester (character), 17
Eurydice (character), 84                              Gospels, 60
Evan (character), 26                                   Gosson,  Stephen, 41, 133, 135

221
212                                                      Index

Gower, John, 56                                          Horatio,  Count  (character), 38, 82
Grace, Dominick,   157                               Hostess (character), 24
Grassi, Giacomo, 188                                 Hotspur  (character), 9
Gravedigger (character), 25                        Hotspur,  Lady  (character), 25
Gray’s Inn, 57                                              Houghton  family,  59
Greenblatt, Stephen, 84,  159                     Hugh  of St. Victor  (character), 155
Gregory (character), 81, 189–191               Hunter,  G. K.,  79
Grendler, Paul F., 187                                 Huston,  Hollis,  127
Grimaldi  (character), 130
Grumio  (character), 16, 20                         Imogen  (character), 100
Guise (character), 121                                informal   English,  5–26
Gurr,  Andrew,  136                                     Inner Temple,  57
                                                                    Innocent  III   (pope), 60, 62
Hades, 91, 101–103, 105, 109, 111 Inns            of  Court,  57
Hal,  Prince (character), 9–11, 20               Instruction of a Christen Woman, The, 
Hall,  Edward  T., 127–128, 134                      160
Hall,  John, 39                                             Iphigenia at Aulis, 104
Hamlet  (character), 16, 18, 25, 40,            Isabella (character), 26, 71,  112
    82,  109, 148, 153, 162                           Italy,  103
Hamlet, 7, 17, 25, 153, 185                              Corioles, 136
Hattaway, Michael,  15                                     Mantua,  156
hedonism, 41                                                    Umbria, 63
Helen of Troy  (character), 24, 104,                 Venice, 63
    109                                                               Verona, 64, 82, 123, 170, 177, 189
Helena (character), 39
Heminge  and Cordell,  6                            Jachimo (character), 100
Henry  IV  (character), 26                            Jack Upland, 57
Henry IV, 148                                              Jacobean period, 5
Henry V, 112, 148                                       Jagendorf, Zvi,  137
Henry  VI  (character), 17                            James I (English king),  23
Heraclitus,  186, 191                                   Jessica (character), 109
Hercules, 46                                                Jew of Malta, 38


“ Hermes, 103                                             John, Don  (character), 38
 Her  Muff,”   94                                           John, Friar  (character), 64
                                                                    Jonson, Ben, 92, 107
“ Hero (character), 68–69                            Jove (character), 93
 Hero  as Poet, The,” 59                              Joyce, James, 113
Heroinæ, The, 104                                      Juliet (character), 31–32, 34–37, 40, 
Heroycall Epistles of . . . Publius                     42–43,  46, 48, 69, 71, 79, 82– 
    Ovidius  Naso, The, 105                              85, 87, 91–92, 94,  96, 98–101, 
History of King Lear, The, 7, 17, 163               103–106, 108–110, 112, 121, 123, 
Holmer,  Joan Ozark, 189                                147, 153, 160–161, 169–180, 185, 
Holofernes (Character),  25                             191, 195

222
                                                            Index                                                      213

Katharine  (character), 112                         Mab,  Queen (character), 36, 190
Keats, John, 100                                         Macbeth  (character), 23
Kemble, Charles, 104                                 Macbeth,  Lady  (character), 40

“ King’s Men, 137                                        Macbeth, 133, 162
 Knight’s  Tale, The,”  112                           Madeline  (character), 100
                                                                    Mad  Tom  (character), 25
Lammas Eve, 154                                       Maecenas (character), 43
Lane, Melissa, 187                                      Mahood,  M.  M.,  37, 79
Lartius,  Titus  (character), 138–139 mandragora,           42,  46
La sfortunata morte di dui infelicissimi        mandrake,  35, 42
    amanti,  64                                              Marcus  (character), 100
Laura (character), 193                                Margaret,   Queen (character), 17
Lavatch (character), 24                               Mariana  (character), 71
Lavinia  (character), 100, 103, 110,            Marlowe,  Christopher,   37, 62, 64, 93
    112                                                          Marshall,   Cynthia,  127, 162
Lawrence, Friar  (character), 31,                 Marston,  John, 107
    34–36,  39, 41, 64, 66–72, 84,  95,         Martius,   Caius (character), 106, 
    101, 106, 108–109, 121, 124,  131,             136–139
    152, 157–158, 190–191, 195                  Master  of the Revels, 7
Laws (Plato), 187                                        Match Me in  London, 38
Law Tricks, 38
Lear, King  (character), 17                          Maus,  Katharine,  131
Lefebvre, Henri,  126                                  Mead,  Robert,  103
Leontes (character), 109                             Measure for Measure, 9, 56, 58, 60, 
Lepidus (character), 43                                    70–72, 112
Lethe, 43, 45                                               Medwall,   Henry,  185
Levenson, Jill L.,  152                                 Melesippus  (character), 103
Life of Chaucer, 55, 59                                Memory,  147
Life of Marc Antonie, 45                                   theater, 147–162
Lincoln’s Inn,  57                                         Menas (character), 16
Lodowick,  Friar  (character), 71–72 Menenius            (character), 24, 137
Lord  Chamberlain’s Men,  122                   Menocrates (character), 44
Lorenzo, Frate  (character), 64, 96,            Merchant of Venice, The, 96, 106, 109
    109                                                          Mercutio  (character), 10–13, 20,  30, 
love, 169                                                          35, 79, 82–83,  92, 95, 158, 172, 
Lovelace, Richard,  94                                     189–190, 192–196
Love’s Labours Lost, 19                              Merry  Wives of Windsor, The, 8, 18
Love’s sacrifice, 107                                   Messenger (character), 23
Lucio (character), 9                                     Metamorphoses, 100
Lucrece (character), 93, 101, 104,              Middle  Temple,  57
    107, 109–112                                          Middleton,   Thomas,  8, 107
Lurdo,  Count  (character), 38                     “Miller’s   Tale, The,”  21
Lyly, John, 100                                            Milton,   John, 59, 62, 84, 110
Lysander (character), 39                             Miranda  (character), 112, 148, 162

223
214                                                      Index

Moll  (character), 94                                    Paradise Lost, 110
Monsieur (character), 121                           Paré, Ambroise,  39
Montague family  (characters), 64,             Paris,  36, 69, 91, 103–107, 109–110, 
    79, 172                                                         191
     Montague-Capulet  feud, 81                  Paris  (character), 122
Montecchi  family,  64                                 Parmenides, 186
Montsurry  (character), 122                         Parthenophil  (character), 93
More, Thomas,  7                                        Paster, Gail Kern,  126
Moth  (character), 20                                   Penny-Dub  (character), 94
Mousetrap, 153                                           Pericles (character), 9
Much Ado About Nothing, 56, 58, 60,         Pericles, 8–9
    68,  71                                                     Persephone, 101, 103–104, 106, 109
Munday, Anthony,   7                                  Peter of Ravenna, 150
                                                                    Petrarch,  82, 110
narcotics, 41                                                     Petrarchism, 170
Nerissa (character), 16                               Petruccio  (character), 16, 20, 22
Newman, John Henry,  59                          Philomel   (character), 100–101, 109
North,  Thomas,  45                                    Phlegethon,  102
Novy, Marianne,  79                                    Phoebe (character), 112
Nurse (character), 12, 20, 22,  94–95,        Phoebus, 102
    101, 112, 152–153, 159–161                  Pistol  (character), 21, 24–25
Nym (character), 8,  21                               plague, 38
                                                                    Plato, 30,  159, 186, 191, 193, 196
Oceanus, 186                                                   Platonism, 82
Ophelia (character), 18, 22,  25                  Playes Confuted in Five Actions, 133
opium, 38                                                    Plowman’s Tale, The, 57
orchard scene, 169–180                             Plutarch,  45, 47
Order of  St Francis, see also                     poetry,  30
    Franciscan Order,  62                             Poins (character), 20
Orlando  (character), 14                              Poisons, 29–49
Orpheus (character), 84                              Polonius (character), 16, 24
Othello, 29, 95, 162                                     Pompey (character), 43–45
Ovid,  94, 100, 106                                      poppy, 38
Oxford  collected edition,  7                        Porphyro  (character), 100
Oxford English Dictionary, 5, 14, 18,          Portia  (character), 16
    21, 23                                                      Porto,  Luigi  da, 64
Oxford  University,  56                                Practice (Saviolo), 188
                                                                    Priam  (character), 104
Page, Mr. (character), 18                            Princess of France (character), 19
Page, Mrs. (character), 10                          Procne (character), 100
Pandarus (character), 24                            Production de l’espace, 126
Papacy, 61                                                  Proserpine (character), 84
Paracelsus, 32, 38                                      Prospero (character), 40, 148

224
                                                            Index                                                      215

Protagoras, 186                                          Ruffel  (character), 38
Protestantism, 59                                        Rutland  (character), 16
Prynne, William,   40
psychomachia, 124                                     Sabine women
Puritan, The, 94                                                rape of, 101
Putana (character), 130                              Salutati,  Coluccio,  111
Puttenham,  George, 125                            Sampson (character), 80, 99
Pyramus (character), 40, 109                     Samson, 190–191
                                                                    Saviolo, Vincentio, 188, 190, 192, 195
Queen Mab  speech, 83, 192                      Scarus (character), 44
Quickly,  Mrs.  (character), 8, 19, 21 Sebastian           (character), 103
                                                                    Second Murderer  (character), 20
racism, 112                                                 Seneca, 162
rape, 91–113                                               sexuality, 104
Rape of Lucrece, The, 98, 101, 104,          Shallow,  Justice (character), 148, 

“ 112,   132                                                       153, 162
 Rapture,  The,” 102                                    Sharpham, Edward,  38
Reformation,  62                                         Shylock  (character), 16
Regan (character), 17                                 Sidney, Philip,  83,  129, 132
Renaissance, 35, 40, 92, 95, 111,              Silver,  George, 188
    126,  187                                                 Silvius  (character), 112
     greetings, 171                                        Sir Thomas More, 7
Republic, The (Plato), 30, 187                    sisterhood of  St Clare, 71
Richard II   (English  king),  56                    Slender (character), 18
Richard the Third, 20                                  Sly, Christopher   (character), 25, 40
Rivers, George, 104                                    Smith,  Bruce, 134
Riverside Shakespeare, 7                           Snow, Edward,  85, 108
Robin (character), 10                                  Socrates, 186, 188–190, 196
Romans, 138                                               Soens, Adolph L.,  194
Romberch, Johannes, 150, 154                  Sonnet 63 (Barnes), 93
Rome, 41, 44, 46–47, 60–62,  101             Sonnets, 6
Romeo (character), 30, 32–33, 35– Sophonisba,          107
    37, 40, 43,  46, 48, 64, 69, 91–96,          Soranzo (character), 129
    98–101, 103, 106–107, 109–111,           Spanish Tragedy, The, 103
    121, 123,  147, 149, 152–155, 157– Sparke       (character), 38
    158, 160,  162, 169–180, 189–193,        Speght, Thomas,  55, 57–59
    195                                                          Spencer, T. J. B., 158
     death of, 79–87                                      Spenser, Edmund,  59
Romeus (character), 105                            Spevacks, 7
Rosalind, 82–83,  87                                   Spit,  Nan (character), 93
Rosaline (character), 30, 92, 95, 170,         St. Paul’s, 122
    175                                                          Stern, Tiffany,   148, 152

225
216                                                      Index

Stubbes, Phillip,  134–135                          Ubersfeld,  Anne,  123
Subject of Tragedy, The, 140                      Upper Church  of San Francesco 
suicide, 48, 121                                                (Assisi), 60
Sutton, John, 149, 152
Swift,  Jonathan, 19                                    Valasco, Don  (character), 38
syphilis, 38                                                  Valeria  (character), 137
                                                                    Vasques (character), 130
Taming of the Shrew, The, 22, 40               Venus, 106
Tamyra (character), 122, 124                     Venus and Adonis, 6
Tarquin  (character), 91, 93, 100,               Vespasian, 121
    108–109, 111                                          Vincentio,  Duke  (character), 70
Tempest, The, 9, 101, 148                          Virgilia   (character), 137
Tereus (character), 91, 100, 108, 110 Vives,         Juan Luis, 160
Tethys, 186                                                 Volpone, 107
Theaetetus (character), 187, 192–193 Volsces,       138
Theaetetus, 186, 196                                  Volumnia  (character), 138
Theseus, 95, 104                                        voyeurism,  92
Thidias  (character), 43

’ Thisbe (character), 39, 109
Tis  Pity She’s a Whore, 107, 128, 133,      Wall,  Wendy, 160
    137                                                          Webster, John, 62, 64,  103
Titania  (character), 100                              Weimann,  Robert,  135
Titus Andronicus, 100, 103, 106, 112 Wells,          Robin,  172
Toby, Sir (character), 25                             Whetstone,  George,  63–64
Touchstone (character), 24                         White Devil,  The, 62
Tourneur, Cyril,   103                                  Whittier,    Gayle, 177
Tragicall Historye of Romeus and               Willis,   John, 149–150
    Juliet, The, 64, 67, 92, 105, 169 Winter’s             Tale, The, 20, 101
Trinculo  (character), 9                                Women Beware Women, 107
Troilus (character), 109                               Worcester (character), 26
Troilus and Cressida, 24, 104                     Works (Chaucer), 55
Tuan, Yi-Fu,  127
Turberville,  George, 105                            Yates, Frances, 149, 151
Two Noble Kinsmen, The, 8, 112                Yorick (character), 148, 153
Tybalt (character), 26, 33, 81–82,  95, 
    100,  110, 190–192, 194–195                 Ziegler,  Georgiana, 132

