2
                Bloom’s     Modern        Critical        Interpretations


Th e Adventures of           Great  Expectations           One  Flew over the 
  Huckleberry  Finn            Th e Great Gatsby               Cuckoo’s Nest
Th e Age of Innocence Gulliver’s      Travels               One Hundred  Years of 
Alice’s Adventures in        Hamlet                                  Solitude
  Wonderland                    Heart  of  Darkness            Othello
All  Quiet  on the               Th e House on Mango       Persuasion
  Western Front                   Street                               Portnoy’s Complaint
Animal  Farm                    I  Know  Why  the               Pride and Prejudice
Th e Ballad of the Sad         Caged Bird Sings            Ragtime
  Café                                Th e Iliad                            Th e Red Badge of 
Beloved                             Invisible  Man                       Courage
Beowulf                             Jane Eyre                          Romeo  and Juliet
Black Boy                          Th e Joy Luck Club            Th e Rubáiyát of Omar 
Th e Bluest Eye                Julius Caesar                        Khayyám
Th e Canterbury Tales Th     e Jungle                         Th e Scarlet Letter
Cat on a Hot  Tin               King  Lear                          A Separate Peace
  Roof                                Long  Day’s Journey          Silas Marner
Catch-22
                                            into  Night                        Slaughterhouse-Five
Th e Catcher in the                                                      Song of Solomon
                                          Lord  of the  Flies
  Rye                                                                            Th e Sound and the 
                                          Th e Lord of the Rings
Th e Chronicles of                                                          Fury
                                          Love in  the Time  of 
  Narnia                                                                        Th e Stranger
                                            Cholera
Th e Color Purple                                                        A  Streetcar Named 
                                          Macbeth
Crime and                                                                      Desire
                                          Th e Man Without 
  Punishment                                                               Sula
Th e Crucible                       Qualities                          Th e Sun Also Rises
Cry, the Beloved               Th e Merchant of                Th e Tale of Genji
  Country                              Venice                             A Tale of Two  Cities
Darkness at Noon             Th e Metamorphosis          “Th e Tell-Tale Heart” 
Death of a Salesman        A  Midsummer  Night’s         and Other  Stories
Th e Death of Artemio         Dream                             Th eir Eyes Were 
  Cruz                                Miss  Lonelyhearts               Watching  God
Th e Diary of Anne            Moby-Dick                         Th ings Fall Apart
  Frank                               My  Ántonia                       Th e Th ings Th ey 
Don Quixote                      Native Son                           Carried
Emerson’s Essays            Night                                  To  Kill  a Mockingbird
Emma                               1984                                   Ulysses
Fahrenheit 451                  Th e Odyssey                    Waiting  for  Godot
A Farewell to  Arms          Oedipus  Rex                     Th e Waste Land
Frankenstein                     Th e Old Man  and the       Wuthering  Heights
Th e Glass Menagerie         Sea                                  Young Goodman 
Th e Grapes of Wrath On        the Road                        Brown

4
Bloom’s Modern Critical Interpretations


             William  Shakespeare’s 
     Th e  Merchant       of  Venice
                    New Edition




       Edited and with an introduction by
                  Harold  Bloom
      Sterling Professor of the Humanities
                    Yale University

5
Bloom’s Modern Critical   Interpretations:   The Merchant  of Venice—New  Edition
Copyright ©  2010 by Infobase Publishing
Introduction ©  2010 by Harold Bloom

All  rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or 
by any information storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the 
publisher. For more information contact:

Bloom’s Literary Criticism
An imprint  of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001

Library  of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication    Data 
William   Shakespeare’s The merchant of Venice / edited  and with   an introduction  by 
Harold Bloom. —  New ed.
       p. cm. — (Bloom’s modern critical interpretations)
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
   ISBN  978-1-60413-885-6 (hardcover)
   ISBN  978-1-4381-3435-2 (e-book)
   1.  Shakespeare, William,  1564–1616. Merchant  of  Venice.   2.  Shylock  (Fictitious 
character)  3.  Jews in literature.   I.   Bloom, Harold. 
   PR2825.W56 2010
   822.3'3—dc22
                                                               2010006132

Bloom’s Literary Criticism books are available at special discounts when purchased in 
bulk quantities for businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call 
our Special Sales Department in New York at (212)967-8800 or (800)322-8755.

You can find Bloom’s Literary Criticism on the World  Wide Web at  
http://www.chelseahouse.com

Contributing  editor: Pamela Loos 
Cover design by Takeshi Takahashi
Composition by IBT  Global, Troy NY
Cover printed by IBT  Global, Troy NY
Book printed and bound by IBT  Global, Troy NY
Date printed: July 2010
Printed in the United  States of America

10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

This book is printed on acid-free paper.

All  links and Web addresses were checked and verified to be correct at the time of 
publication. Because of the dynamic nature of the Web, some addresses and links may 
have changed since publication and may no longer be valid.

6
                                                Contents







Editor’s Note                           vii

Introduction                            1
        Harold Bloom

Marriage and Mercifixion   in  The Merchant 
        of Venice: The Casket Scene Revisited                         9
        Harry  Berger Jr.

The Cuckoo’s Note: Male  Friendship and 
        Cuckoldry  in  The Merchant of Venice                        19
        Coppélia Kahn

Portia’s Belmont                          29
        Richard A. Levin

The Merchant of Venice                        65
        Robert Ornstein

A Garden in  Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1                        97
        Harry  Levin

Which  Is the Merchant Here? And  Which  the Jew?: 
        The  Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice                     117
        To ny Tanner

The Merchant of Venice                        139
        W. H.  Auden

7
vi                                                 Contents


The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money                        151
        Peter D. Holland

Law and Self-Interest  in The Merchant of Venice                        173
        Grace Tiffany

Chronology                           187

Contributors                           189

Bibliography                           191

Acknowledgments                           195

Index                          197

8
                                            Editor’s      Note











My introduction  dwells on Shylock’s conversion, a critique of Marlowe that 
costs the play dearly, destroying the plausibility of Shakespeare’s comic vil-
lain as a character.
       Harry  Berger Jr. revisits the casket scene in discerning Portia’s divine 
powers of mercifixion, after which Coppélia Kahn explores male friendship 
and betrayal in the play.
       Richard A. Levin traces how the misfortunes of Venice follow the char-
acters to idyllic Belmont, the setting of Portia’s villa. Robert Ornstein locates 
the work’s climactic resolution in the fourth act, which clears the way for the 
delusions of the play’s ending.
       Harry  Levin  returns us to the concord of Belmont and the play’s final 
act, followed by Tony Tanner’s parsing of Portia’s telling question, upon enter-
ing court, “Which is the merchant here? and which the Jew?”
       W. H.  Auden suggests that a society built on speculative trade encour-
ages frivolity and impulsiveness in the personal affairs of its citizens, after 
which Peter D. Holland also meditates on the ducat-mad world of the play. 
Grace Tiffany concludes the volume exploring the ways self-interest and the 
law intersect in The Merchant of Venice.










                                                        vii

10
                                 HAROLD       BLOOM


                                        Introduction







Of     Shakespeare’s displaced spirits, those enigmatic figures who some-
times seem to have wandered into the wrong play, Shylock clearly remains 
the most problematical. We need always to keep reminding ourselves that 
he is a comic villain, partly derived from the grandest of Marlovian scoun-
drels, Barabas, Jew of Malta. In some sense, that should place Shylock in 
the Machiavellian company of two villains of tragedy, Edmund and Iago, 
yet none of us wishes to see Shylock there. Edmund and Iago are apoca-
lyptic humorists; self-purged of pathos, they frighten us because continu-
ally they invent themselves while manipulating others. Shylock’s pathos 
is weirdly heroic; he was meant to frighten us, to be seen as a nightmare 
made into flesh and blood, while seeking the audience’s flesh and blood. 
It seems clear to me that if Shakespeare himself were to be resurrected, in 
order to direct a production of The Merchant of Venice on a contemporary 
stage in New York City, there would be a riot, quite without the assistance 
of the Jewish Defense League. The play is both a superb romantic comedy 
and a marvelously adequate version of a perfectly Christian, altogether 
murderous anti-Semitism, of a kind fused into Christianity by the Gospel 
of John in particular.
       In that latter assertion, or parts of it, I follow after the formidable E. E. 
Stoll, who observed that Shylock’s penalty was the heaviest to be discovered 
in all the pound-of-ﬂ esh stories. As Stoll said, in none of them “does the 
money-lender suﬀ er like Shylock—impoverishment, sentence of death, and 
an outrage done to his faith from which Jews were guarded even by decrees 
of German Emperors and Roman pontiﬀ s.” Of all the enigmas presented by 


                                                    1

11
2                                              Harold Bloom


Th e Merchant of Venice, to me the most baﬄ  ing is Shylock’s broken acceptance 
of forced conversion. Is it persuasive? Surely not, since Shakespeare’s Shylock, 
proud and ﬁ erce Jew, scarcely would have preferred Christianity to death. 
Consistency of character in Shylock admittedly might have cost Shakespeare 
the comedy of his comedy; a Shylock put to death might have shadowed the 
ecstasy of Belmont in act 5. But so does the forced conversion, for us, though 
clearly not for Shakespeare and his contemporary audience. Th e diﬃ  cult but 
crucial question becomes: Why did Shakespeare inﬂ ict the cruelty of the false 
conversion, knowing he could not allow Shylock the tragic dignity of dying 
for his people’s faith?
       I  ﬁ nd it astonishing that this question has never been asked anywhere 
in the published criticism of Th e Merchant of Venice. No other Shakespearean 
character who has anything like Shylock’s representational force is handled so 
strangely by Shakespeare and ultimately so inadequately. Th at Shylock should 
agree to become a Christian is more absurd than would be the conversion of 
Coriolanus to the popular  party or Cleopatra’s consent to become a vestal 
virgin at Rome. We sooner could see Falstaﬀ  as a monk than we can contem-
plate Shylock as a Christian. Shakespeare notoriously possessed the powers 
both of  preternatural irony and of  imbuing  a character with more vitality 
than a play’s context could sustain. I cannot better the judgment on Christian 
conversion that Launcelot Gobbo makes in his dialogue with the charmingly 
insuﬀ erable Jessica, that Jewish Venetian princess:


       Jessica: I shall be sav’d by my husband, he hath made me a 
       Christian!
       Launcelot: Truly, the more to blame he; we were Christians 
       enow before, e’en as many as could well live one by another. Th is 
       making  of Christians will  raise the price of hogs. If we grow all 
       to  be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals 
       for  money.


       But  Shakespeare takes care to distance this irony from the play’s comic 
catastrophe, when the Jew is undone by Christian mercy. It is Antonio, the 
pious Jew baiter, who adds to the Duke’s pardon the requirement that Shy-
lock immediately become a Christian, after which Shakespeare seems a touch 
anxious to get Shylock oﬀ stage as quietly and quickly as possible:


       Duke: He shall do this, or else I do recant
       Th e pardon that I late pronounced here.
       Portia: Art  thou contented, Jew? what dost thou say?
       Shylock: I am content.

12
                                                 Introduction                                               

       Portia: Clerk, draw a deed of gift.
       Shylock: I pray you give me leave to go from hence.
       I  am not well. Send the deed after me,
       And  I will  sign it.

       And  in a moment, Shylock walks out of the play, to the discord of what 
must seem to us Gratiano’s Nazilike jeers and threats. In our post-Holocaust 
universe, how can we accommodate Shylock’s “I am content,” too broken for 
irony, too strong for any play whatsoever? That question, I think, is unanswer-
able and does not belong to literary criticism anyway. What is essential for 
criticism is to ask and answer the double question: Why did Shakespeare so 
represent his stage Jew as to make possible the romantic interpretation that 
has proceeded from Hazlitt and Henry  Irving  right  through to  Harold C. 
Goddard and innumerable actors in our century, and having done so, why did 
the playwright then shatter the character’s consistency by imposing on him 
the acceptance of the humiliating forced conversion to that religion of mercy, 
the Christianity of Venice?
       In  his lively essay on the play, W. H. Auden remarks on a different kind 
of implausibility that Shakespeare confers on Shylock:

       After   Portia  has trapped  Shylock through   his own  insistence 
       upon the  letter of the law  of Contract, she produces another law 
       by  which any alien who  conspires against the life of a Venetian 
       citizen  forfeits his goods and places his life at the Doge’s mercy. 
       Even in the rush of a stage performance, the audience cannot help 
       reflecting that  a man as interested in legal subtleties as Shylock, 
       would, surely, have been aware of the existence of this law and that, 
       if  by any chance he had overlooked it, the Doge surely would very 
       soon have drawn his attention to it. Shakespeare, it seems to me, 
       was willing  to introduce what  is an absurd implausibility for  the 
       sake of an effect which he could not secure without it.

       Auden is very shrewd here, but I cite him primarily to help suggest that 
Shylock’s acceptance of enforced Christianity is a far more severe implausi-
bility and one that distracts from dramatic or even theatrical effect. Indeed, 
as drama Shylock’s “I am content” is necessarily a puzzle, not akin, say, to 
Iago’s “From this time forth  I  never will speak word.” Iago will  die, under 
torture, in  absolute silence: a dramatic death. We anticipate that Shylock 
the broken new Christian will  live  in silence: not a dramatic life. Is it  that 
Shakespeare wished to repeal Shylock, as it were, and so cut away the enor-
mous pathos of the  character? We have seen no weaknesses in Shylock’s 

13
                                             Harold Bloom

will, no  signs indeed that  he can serve the function  of a  comic villain,  a 
new Barabas. No red wig and giant nose will transform the speaker of Shy-
lock’s 360 dark lines into  a two-dimensional  character. Shylock, however 
monstrous his contemplated revenge, is all spirit, malign and concentrated, 
indifferent to the world  and the flesh, unless Antonio be taken to represent 
both for him.  Displaced spirit and so villain  as he is, Shylock confronts in 
the heroically Christian  merchant of Venice his tormentor and his double, 
the play’s best Christian, who demonstrates the authenticity of his religious 
and moral zeal by his prowess in spitting at and cursing Shylock. I intend 
no irony there, and I  fear that I  read Shakespeare as he meant to be read. 
And yet every time I teach The Merchant of Venice, my students rebel at my 
insistence that Shylock is not there to be sympathized with, whereas Anto-
nio is to be admired, if we are to read the play that Shakespeare wrote. One 
had best state this matter very plainly: To recover the comic splendor of The 
Merchant of Venice now, you need to be either a scholar or an anti-Semite, or 
best of all an anti-Semitic scholar.
       E. E.  Stoll sensibly said that if you sympathize with Shylock, then you 
must turn against Portia, a lesson that modern directors refuse to learn, pre-
ferring to have it both ways: a Shylock of sublime pathos and a Portia trium-
phant and wholly delightful. What  is a serious reader to do with the more 
severe difference that is confronted when Goddard and C. L. Barber, two of 
the handful of great critics of Shakespeare in our time, are juxtaposed on the 
question of Shylock? Barber deftly improves on Stoll, first by noting that we 
never encounter Shylock alone, which denies the villain his inwardness and 
makes him subject to a group perspective. Second, Barber goes on:

       This perspective on him does not exclude a potential pathos. There 
       is  always potential  pathos, behind, when  drama makes fun  of 
       isolating, anti-social qualities. Indeed, the process of making fun of 
       a person often works by exhibiting pretensions to humanity so as 
       to show that they are inhuman, mechanical, not validly appropriate 
       for  sympathy.

       Barber’s persuasive view cannot be reconciled with Goddard’s grand 
sentence: “Shylock’s conviction that Christianity and revenge are synonyms 
is confirmed.” For Goddard, Portia becomes one with the golden casket and 
fails her own inner  self. On that reading, we return to  a Shylock of tragic 
pathos and hardly to Barber’s comic butt. René Girard, our  contemporary 
authority on scapegoating, attempts to solve contradictory readings by ironiz-
ing Shakespeare:

14
                                                 Introduction                                               5


       Ultimately  we do not  have to choose between a favorable and an 
       unfavorable image of Shylock. Th e old critics have concentrated 
       on Shylock as a separate entity, an individual substance that would 
       be  merely juxtaposed to other individual  substances and remain 
       unaﬀ ected by them. Th e ironic depth in  Th e Merchant of Venice 
       results from  a tension not between two static images of Shylock, 
       but   between those textual  features that  strengthen and  those 
       features that  undermine the popular  idea of an  insurmountable 
       diﬀ erence between Christian and Jew.


       I  am myself a survivor of those “old critics” whom Girard  scorns, and, 
like them, I do  not speak of entities, substances, textual features, and ironic 
diﬀ erences. One learns from Shakespeare to speak of characters, and the 
issue remains: Why did Shakespeare ultimately refuse consistency to his Jew, 
whether viewed as comic or as a ﬁ gure of profound pathos? I cannot ﬁ nd 
more than a few aesthetic ﬂ aws in Shakespeare, and Shylock’s acceptance of 
conversion seems to me much the most egregious, surpassing the peculiar 
ﬁ nal scene of Measure for Measure and even the brutal treatment of Mal-
volio at the end of Twelfth Night. Since act 5 of Th e Merchant of Venice is a 
triumphal ecstasy, the collapse of Shylock’s pride in his Jewishness perhaps 
becomes an artistic blemish only when I brood on it in my study, but then I 
have never seen, will never see, and could not bear seeing a production of the 
play that is consonant with the play’s own values.
       Shylock  is one of  Shakespeare’s displaced spirits, together with Bar-
nardine, Lear’s Fool, Malvolio, in some sense even Caliban, perhaps even an 
aspect of Sir John Falstaﬀ , perhaps even the outcast Edgar, who is so slow to 
abandon his mask as poor Tom o’Bedlam. We do not know who wrote the 
great lyric “Tom o’Bedlam” found in a manuscript commonplace that scholars 
date about 1620, but being very unscholarly I always cheerfully assume that 
it was Shakespeare because it is too good to be by anyone else. I cite its ﬁ nal 
stanza here because it sums up, for me, the ethos of the ultimately displaced 
spirit, the Shakespearean outsider who needs a context less alien than Shake-
speare will provide for him:


       With   an host of furious fancies
       Whereof  I am commander,
       With   a burning spear and a horse of air,
       To the wilderness I wander.
       By a knight  of ghosts and shadows
       I  summoned am to a tourney

15
6                                              Harold Bloom


       Ten leagues beyond the wide world’s end:
       Methinks  it is no journey.
       Yet will  I sing, Any food, any feeding,
       Feeding, drink, or clothing;
       Come dame or maid, be not afraid,
       Poor Tom will  injure nothing.


       One  can hardly say that poor Shylock, incessantly demanding that he 
will have his bond, will injure nothing, and even I would hesitate at speaking 
of “poor Shylock” had not Shakespeare invented the monstrosity of the forced 
conversion. But the great Tom o’Bedlam song, whoever wrote it, manifests the 
same mixture of unbearable pathos and visionary intensity that I ﬁ nd in all of 
Shakespeare’s displaced spirits: Shylock, Barnardine, Lear’s Fool, Malvolio, and 
in a weird mode, Caliban. Ambivalence emanates from all of these, as it does 
from the alienated Edgar, and ambivalence is part of our response to them 
also. Oddly the least original of these, Shylock is too much the Belial ﬁ gure of 
Christian tradition, and one wonders why Shakespeare could accept so much 
crudity of stock representation, even as he allowed the apparent pathos in Shy-
lock that continues to divide critics. I suspect that the enigmas concerning Shy-
lock can be resolved only if we return Shakespeare’s Jew to his agonistic context, 
the Shakespearean need to compete with and overgo Marlowe’s superb villain, 
Barabas, the Jew of Malta. Barabas is a farcical hero-villain, while Shylock is a 
comic villain, yet the contrast between them tends to abolish such distinctions. 
Could we conceive of Barabas accepting an imposed conversion? Th e question’s 
absurdity turns on Marlowe’s dramatic art, which works here as the purest cari-
cature, excluding any possibilities of pathos. Barabas could no more say “If you 
prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh?” than Shylock could 
roar out the parodic outrageousness and exuberance of Marlowe’s Jew:


       As for  myself, I walk abroad a-nights,
       And  kill  sick people groaning under walls;
       Sometimes I go about and poison wells.


       Marlowe,  subverting  every established order  and  tradition,  loathes 
Christians, Muslims, and Jews with admirable impartiality, and so he is happy 
to have Barabas satirize the Christian myth of the Jewish sport of poisoning 
wells. Shakespeare hardly could have missed the jest, but for him Marlowe 
always represented, in art as in life, the way down and out, the way not to go. 
Th e savage gusto of Barabas is deliberately lacking in the rugged Shylock, 
whose only exuberance is his will to revenge himself, and his people, on that 
sincere Christian, the noble Antonio. Antonio’s superior goodness is shown 

16
                                                 Introduction                                               

to us by his righteous contempt for Shylock. Splendid as this must have been 
for Shakespeare’s audience, it is now our largest burden, I sometimes think, in 
reading The Merchant of Venice. Antonio is a Jew baiter, plain and simple. Mar-
lowe gives us no such figure in The Jew of Malta, yet I suspect that Marlowe 
provoked Shakespeare into the ambivalence of our having to accept Antonio 
and Portia as angels, and Shylock as the Devil, albeit a Devil with strong feel-
ings, akin to Marlowe’s Mephistopheles in Doctor Faustus.
       Though Barabas seems to me Shakespeare’s prime model for Richard III 
and even for Aaron the Moor in Titus Andronicus, Barabas has nothing Shake-
spearean about him. There is a mad zest in Barabas, a kind of antic ferocity, 
that Shakespeare rejected as too raw, a rejection of great consequence, since it 
spurred Shakespeare into the creation of Edmund and Iago. That Marlovian 
parody, Ancient Pistol, is Shakespeare’s sardonic commentary on Marlowe’s 
exaltation of self-celebratory and exuberant ferocity. “I’ll show you a Jew!” 
Shakespeare says to us by Shylock, thus implying that Barabas is no Jew but 
simply is Kit Marlowe. Barabas, of course, is a superbly outrageous represen-
tation of a Jew; he is no more Jewish than Marlowe’s Christians are Chris-
tians or his Muslims are Muslims. Is there a more vivid, a more memorable 
representation of a Jew in postbiblical literature than Shakespeare’s Shylock? 
Well, there is the Fagin of  Charles Dickens, clearly more memorable than 
George Eliot’s Daniel Deronda but about as acceptable to a post-Holocaust 
sensibility as Shylock. Jewish novelists from Disraeli to the present hardly 
have given us a being as intense as Shylock or as eloquent, though Shylock’s 
eloquence is somber, even so rancid:

       You’ll ask me why I rather choose to have
       A  weight of carrion flesh than to receive
       Three thousand ducats. I’ll not answer that,
       But  say it is my humor. Is it answered?
       What  if my house be troubled with a rat,
       And  I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats
       To have it baned? What, are you answered yet?
       Some men there are love not a gaping pig,
       Some that are mad if they behold a cat,
       And  others, when the bagpipe sings i’ th’ nose,
       Cannot contain their wine; for affection,
       Master of passion, sways it to the mood
       Of  what it likes or loathes.

       Extraordinary psychologist as Shakespeare has made him (akin in this to 
Edmund and Iago), Shylock is totally unable to achieve self-understanding. If 

17
8                                              Harold Bloom


“aﬀ ection” (innate antipathy) totally dominates “passion” (any authentic emo-
tion) in him, that  is because he wills such domination. But thus he plays the 
Christian’s game, and unlike Barabas he can only lose. Barabas goes down in 
pained but clamorous triumph, cursing Christians and Muslims with his ﬁ nal 
burst of spirit. Shylock, as Shakespeare deftly creates him, defeats himself, as 
Iago will, and ends in the terrible humiliation of being “content” to become a 
Christian, when in some sense (the Venetian one) he has been Christianized 
already, by accepting their exaltation of antipathy governing emotion, as in 
the good Antonio. Is this Shakespeare’s irony, or does it not belong instead 
to a commonplace older than Shakespeare, as old as the Talmud? If, as Blake 
grimly insisted, we become what we behold, it is an ancient lesson, far older 
even than Hebraic morality. Shakespeare’s comic villain undoes himself, as 
Barabas does not, in a critique of Marlowe that nevertheless was expensive 
for the play, Th e Merchant of Venice, since it ultimately destroys Shylock’s here-
tofore strong plausibility as a character.
       A  displaced spirit, in Shakespeare, never ceases to be spirit, and though 
it is warped by displacement, such a spirit contaminates the drama through 
which it passes and of necessity contaminates the audience as well. To stage 
the play of Antonio, Portia, and Shylock now is to attempt what is virtually 
impossible, since only an audience at ease with its own anti-Semitism could 
tolerate a responsible and authentic presentation of what Shakespeare actu-
ally wrote. In this one play alone, Shakespeare was very much of his age and 
not for all time.

18
                              HArry         BErGEr        Jr.


        Marriage      and   Mercifixion       in   The   Merchant  
               of   Venice:    The  Casket   Scene  Revisited




If   fathers and children know that the world must be peopled, property 
handed down, and the status quo perpetuated, they also know that the 
price of this investment in the future is the acceptance of death. As Alex-

“ ander Welch has put it, in a fine essay on Shakespeare’s problem comedies, 
 sexuality has constrained the husband to give life to the son, but when he 
married he also acceded to the passing of his generation and his death.”1 
Old fathers like Lear and Gloucester look back to the birth of an heir as 
their first step in prescribing their power, a step that binds them in service 
to their children’s future lordship. The plague of custom and the curiosity 
of nations assign upbringing and inheritance to children as a right, not a 
privilege. Gloucester suspects that the rightful heir, born of the dull, stale, 
tired marriage bed by the order of law, may have more claims on him, may 
be more dangerous as, enemy and competitor, than the child of nature to 
whom nothing is owed. Edgar’s appearance prophesies death, and the legiti-
mate heir may be imagined to grow up waiting for his father to die so that 
he can rightfully claim what his father has kept from him all those years, 
and what his father finally loses: no less than all.
       Against this liability the father balances the major asset provided by the 
begetting of children. In the Republic, Socrates remarks that “just as poets are 
fond of their poems, and fathers of their children, so money-makers too are 


From Shakespeare Quarterly 32, no. 2 (Summer 181): 155–62. Copyright © 181 by The 
Folger Shakespeare Library.


                                                    

19
10                                           Harry Berger Jr. 


serious about money—as their own product; and they are also serious about 
it . . . because it’s useful.” Moneymakers and money; poets and poems; fathers 
and children: these three pairs can easily converge, or change partners. Fathers 
can use children as money, for example, to pay back their debts, and also as 
poems, to guarantee their immortality—to preserve themselves against the 
very death toward which marriage is the ﬁ rst step. Gloucester says that his 
son by the order of law “is no dearer in my account” than the bastard. When 
we let the two senses of that phrase play over each other, they tell us that what 
the father chieﬂ y values in his children is his investment in them—the shares 
of pleasure, shame, trouble, sacriﬁ ce, and legal tenderness he has deposited in 
their characters.
       Th is naturally causes special problems for daughters who ﬁ nd themselves 
assigned the role of commodity in  the alliance market, and in the present 
essay I shall examine Portia’s response to this predicament in Th e Merchant of 
Venice. Th at response is summed up in an ambiguous remark she utters dur-
ing the casket scene. As Bassanio approaches the caskets to make his choice, 
Portia compares him to Hercules about to save the Trojan maiden, Hesione, 
whose father, Laomedon, had oﬀ ered her as a divine sacriﬁ ce to a sea monster. 
Bassanio (says Portia) goes


       With   no less presence, but with much more love,
       Th an young Alcides [Hercules], when he did redeem
       Th e virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
       To the sea monster. I stand for sacriﬁ ce.
           (III.ii.54–57)2


I stand for sacrifice: either (1) I am placed here to be sacrificed, on the verge 
of being captured and destroyed in order to  save my father’s kingdom; or 
(2) I represent sacrifice, stand for the principle of self-giving as I prepare to 
surrender myself to whatever risks lie ahead (a subsequent remark by Portia 
inadvertently throws  its beams on this  sense of the phrase: “So shines a 
good deed in a naughty world,” V.i.91); or finally (3) I  advocate, I demand, 
sacrifice, expecting you to give and hazard all you have. This third sense is 
evoked by the inscription on the lead casket, “Who chooseth me must give 
and hazard all he hath,” and for  this reason it contributes to  the evidence 
cited by those (including myself) who think Portia could conceivably be seen 
to help Bassanio choose the right casket.
       Th e movement from sense 1 to sense 3 is a movement from weakness 
to strength, the third sense shining with more brilliance because set in, and 
set oﬀ  by, the second. Th e force of this movement adds sharpness to an allu-
sion which already has a certain bite to it. Superﬁ cially the analogy between 

20
                      Marriage and Mercifixion in The Merchant of Venice        11


Bassanio’s venturing for Portia and Hercules’ saving Laomedon’s daughter 
from the sea monster must be ﬂ attering to Bassanio. It confers on him the 
role of conquering hero. Th is may appear both tactful and self-canceling to 
those who construe the phrase “I stand for  sacriﬁ ce” as pointing Bassanio 
toward the lead casket, since the words would then negate the very heroism 
they seem to call for. What makes this construal psychologically not improb-
able is the danger she is in, a danger anamorphically portrayed in the mascu-
line marking of the myth she alludes to.
       Hercules answers the father’s summons in order to win, not his daugh-
ter, but his Trojan  horses. It is as if Portia  has guessed that Bassanio had 
earlier described himself to Antonio as one of the many Jasons questing for 
“the sunny locks” that hang on Portia’s temples “like a golden ﬂ eece” (I.ii.169). 
Perhaps the keys that will open those locks are in her father’s gift, like those 
to the caskets in one of which Portia is locked. Th e paternal lock is an emblem 
of wariness and apprehensiveness, of the father’s refusal to trust his daughter’s 
discretion in handling his property (i.e., herself ). It is, then—if we displace 
the father’s distrust and wariness to the lock itself—a shy lock. If, as is likely 
in Venice, Bassanio is another Jason for whom daughter and ducats, person 
and purse, are indistinguishable, then her passion for him will expose her to 
Medea’s doom. Like Medea, who also betrayed her father’s secret and helped 
her lover to the ﬂ eece, she may betray herself. She knows fathers are in league 
with monsters that venture on the deep in search of prey, and perhaps she 
suspects that monster and hero are one. Caught in the male conspiracy, Por-
tia may feel that she can only win her freedom from the father by accepting 
captivity to the husband, moving from one prison or watery deathbed, one set 
of sunny locks, to another.
       Lawrence Hyman  has argued that “the main action of the play is cen-
tered on the struggle between Portia and Antonio for Bassanio’s love.”3 Th is 
action, if analyzed, may be broken down into  the  following  elements. (1) 
Antonio  uses Shylock to put  himself  in  jeopardy so as to bind  Bassanio 
to him  just when Bassanio, through his assistance, is about to embark on 
the venture that will  set him free. (2) Portia uses Shylock to save Antonio 
in order to  break his hold on  Bassanio. (3) She therefore uses Antonio to 
complete her conquest of Bassanio, and in that way she perfects the con-
trol—over herself, her husband, and her property—which her desire placed 
in jeopardy in  the casket scene. Hyman’s argument is persuasive as far as 
it goes, and is especially to be commended for its careful avoidance of the 
temptation to convert the powerful  monosexual attachment of Antonio for 
Bassanio into a homosexual attachment.4 But it does not suﬃ  ciently account 
for other equally important aspects of the play: the centrality of the father–
child theme and the consequent overlapping of family politics  with sexual 

21
12                                           Harry Berger Jr. 


politics; the dilemma posed for Portia by the conﬂ ict within herself between 
the claims of desire and those of fear; and the deep structure of latent or tacit 
action which characterizes the various power struggles. For the most part the 
struggles are by no means practices in the straightforward sense exempliﬁ ed 
by Don  Pedro’s stratagems in Much Ado. It would not be accurate to call 
them plots or scenarios, because they unfold at a less conscious level than that 
which we normally  associate with the construction of plots and scenarios. 
Th is tacit quality is what makes Th e Merchant of Venice so haunting and tan-
talizing a play. A closer look at the casket scene will suggest how this quality 
is conveyed, and will at the same time link Portia’s struggle with her father 
and Bassanio to the conﬂ ict within herself.
       Th e famous problem about the casket scene provides us with a logical 
point of  entry. Critics go  astray when they insist that Portia  either did  or 
did not oﬀ er Bassanio clues to the right casket. Certainly “I stand for sac-
riﬁ ce” and the song’s terminal syllables (rhyming with lead) provide at least 
the makings of clues. Portia may or may not have intended them; Bassanio 
may or may not have missed them. Th e point is rather that the script encour-
ages us to wonder about, and even to debate, the possibility. Th e dialogue 
preceding Portia’s “I stand for sacriﬁ ce” speech is full of hints that  Portia 
knows the secret and that her desire makes her half-willing  to sin against 
her father’s will. Th ese hints are countered—or rather covered, and therefore 
enabled—by formal protestations of her unwillingness to be forsworn. But 
the point is also that, having encouraged us to wonder, the script never gives 
us enough evidence to resolve the issue with conﬁ dence. It is never made clear 
to us whether or not Portia actually intends the clues that lie inertly in  the 
scene. Nor are we able to determine whether Bassanio intuits the clues and 
acts on them, whether he betrays at any time a sense of Portia’s complicity, 
and—most important—whether Portia is any less in the dark about these two 
questions than we are. Th is is important because if she feels he has recognized 
her contribution to the choice she may decide that either (1) he is in her debt 
for the assistance or (2) she is in his power for having compromised herself. 
Th e question of power is thus as ambiguous as the question of knowledge. If 
there is anything at all to these speculations, the result is to make us feel that 
Portia must still be concerned to resolve her doubts by increasing his obliga-
tion and binding him  more securely to her. She knows and fears enough to 
second Gratiano’s opinion that (at least in Venice) “All things that are, / Are 
with more spirit chased than enjoyed” (II.vi.12–13).
       From  the beginning of the scene Portia shows herself divided between 
desire and apprehension. She “betrays” to Bassanio her love for him by being 
conspicuously coy; she lets him see her diﬃ  culty in maintaining maidenly 
decorum: “Th ere’s something tells me, but it is not love, / I would not lose you” 

22
                      Marriage and Mercifixion in The Merchant of Venice        13


(III.ii.4–5).  She would detain him, ﬁ rst for a day or two, and then, a few lines 
later, for a month or two, and she makes it clear that she knows her father’s 
secret: “I could teach you / How to choose right, but then I am forsworn” (III.
ii.10–11). On the other hand, she would detain him “before you venture for 
me.” Venture strikes a diﬀ erent note because it implies some apprehensiveness 
about his interest in her golden ﬂ eece. Th is adds an undertone to her previous 
words; i.e., “Let’s dally a while and enjoy each other’s company before you 
choose and either fail or else, succeeding, win too much—win control not 
only over my person but also over my father’s purse.”
       Th e undertone is louder in “beshrow your eyes, / Th ey have o’erlook’d 
me and divided me” (III.ii.14–15). It is concentrated in the multiple pun on 
“o’erlook’d”: (1) “given me the evil eye, bewitched me” (the sense under which 
the OED lists this line), and here she shifts blame to his eyes for her impulse 
to sin against her father’s will; (2) “looked down on me from above,” which 
suggests the danger of mastery encoded later in her prospective image of 
Bassanio Triumphant, “when true subjects bow / To a new-crowned mon-
arch” (III.ii.49–50);  (3) “looked over and beyond me”—toward the  inheri-
tance—“thus failing to see me, or disregarding me.” Hence “you have divided 
me between the desire that induces me to surrender wholly to you, and the 
premonition that makes me afraid of letting myself be reduced to the golden 
ﬂ eece and locked in a marital casket.”
       “O  these naughty times / Puts bars between the owners and their rights” 
(III.ii.18–19):  desire tells Portia that  her father  bars Bassanio from rights 
conferred by the law of  love, while apprehension tells her that  her father 
and Bassanio bar her from her rightful ownership of her own person and, by 
extension, of her father’s purse. Th e generalized form of her statement blames 
the naughty times for this predicament, and also, we may infer, for any pro-
spective violation of the letter of her father’s will. Self-division makes Portia 
address their relationship as a struggle for power and possession, a struggle 
which her words register as they shift back and forth between the two poles 
of the division—either “mine” or “yours,” but not “ours”:


       Mine  own I would say; but if mine then yours,
       And  so all yours! O these naughty times
       Puts bars between the owners and their rights!
       And  so, though yours, not yours. . . .
           (III.ii.17–20)


She wants him but does not want to betray herself to him, and perhaps she 
would like it  if she could somehow unknowingly conspire with him to out-
wit her father while observing the letter of the law. It  would be ideal if she 

23
14                                           Harry Berger Jr. 


could “let happen” what she wants to happen, if the issue could be decided 
by ordeal: “Prove it so, / Let fortune  go to hell for  it, not I”  (cf. Macbeth’s 
“If  chance will have me King,  why chance may crown me, /  Without  my 
stir” [I.iii.143]).
       Since the  knowledge that  she could teach Bassanio “how to  choose 
right,” and  the possibility  of being  forsworn, are never very far from  her 
mind—for why else should Fortune go to hell—they cannot be absent from 
ours. In fact, I think they loom rather large in the odd dialogue leading up to 
her speech of encouragement. Th e dialogue is odd, even compelling, because 
some of the phrases we hear are muﬄ  ed indicators that Bassanio and Portia 
would each like to draw from the  other (without  being found out) a signal 
of willingness to  dupe the dead father. No  clues are actually being given, 
but the words—if not  the speakers—seem to be sounding out the feasibil-
ity of giving  clues to the readiness to give or receive clues. In the following 
lines, the repeated term “confess,” the question about treason, and the phrase 
“doth teach me answers for deliverance” are meta-clues trying to perform this 
task without seeming to do so. Th ey tend to ﬂ oat away from their syntactical 
context toward a more complicit meaning, and they are barely held in place 
under the sweet nothings of love talk that veil them; they barely sustain the 
innocence of their speakers:


         Bass. Let me choose,
       For as I am, I live upon the rack.
         Por. Upon the rack, Bassanio? Th en confess
       What  treason there is mingled with your love.
         Bass. None but that ugly treason of mistrust
       Which  makes me fear th’enjoying of my love.
       Th ere may as well be amity and life
       ’Tween snow and ﬁ re, as treason and my love.
         Por. Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack
       Where men enforced do speak anything.
         Bass. Promise me life, and I’ll confess the truth.
         Por. Well then, confess and live.
         Bass. Confess and love
       Had  been the very sum of my confession!
       O  happy torment, when my torturer
       Doth  teach me answers for deliverance.
       But  let me to my fortune and the caskets.
         Por. Away then! I am locked in one of them.
       If  you do love me, you will ﬁ nd me out.
           (III.ii.24–41)

24
                      Marriage and Mercifixion in The Merchant of Venice        15


       Given Portia’s apprehensions, she might well entertain varying responses 
to his impatience: fear of losing him if he fails; fear and desire of his impor-
tunate passion (and hers); fear of his haste to win her in order to secure his 
fortune. Yet her question about treason may also put out feelers that lightly 
probe his willingness to betray her father. Against Bassanio’s hyperbole of the 
rack she will later pit the image of Hesione chained to a rock. Th e three lines 
beginning with “promise me life, and I’ll confess the truth” are interchange-
able: if Portia were asking for life and oﬀ ering to teach him “how to choose 
right,” Bassanio could be urging her to confess and live, and Portia would 
then seem to be recoiling from direct disclosure while keeping his hopes alive. 
Th at the assignment of lines is easily reversible indicates both the similar-
ity and the conﬂ ict between them. Each says what she or he might like the 
other to say but would not dream of saying herself or himself. Portia plays the 
inquisitor, but this is a role which, if she were more crass, she could conceiv-
ably induce upon Bassanio, assigning him the function of torturing out of her 
the “answers for deliverance” (for her deliverance as well as his) which she 
would have too many scruples to oﬀ er voluntarily, not only the scruple about 
being forsworn but also the scruple about crowning Bassanio over her as her 
monarch. Bassanio’s last two lines in the above passage come dangerously 
close to sounding as if she had in fact triggered in him a suspicion that she 
was ready to teach him how to choose. Portia quickly backs oﬀ , terminating 
the discussion. She would have reason to shrink from his possessive “let me 
to my fortune,” and perhaps also from the aural trace of “lead” (the verb, not 
the metal) in “let.”  If we sense these submerged resonances, they vibrate in 
her ﬁ nal rejoinder: she might terminate the dialogue because she feels she 
has secured his complicity and because she fears he has already found her 
out. “Th at ugly treason of mistrust” (that ugly mistrust of treason) is at work 
beneath the surface of these lines.
       It  will  not do to say, as I was on the verge of saying, that Bassanio and 
Portia carefully avoid the conspiratorial possibilities that  play about these 
lines. I do not mean to attribute to either of them—not even to Portia—that 
much awareness of the desire to actualize the betrayal of the secret. Th e desire, 
however, hovers tantalizingly in the air of their language, and their airy words 
seem by themselves to submit to the pressure even as they assert the inno-
cence of their speakers’ love play. Th at Bassanio’s subsequent demeanor gives 
absolutely nothing away does not mean that these subtextual implications 
are absent from the casket scene. Rather it means that they remain present 
throughout the remainder of the play, aﬀ ecting our—and Portia’s—response 
to ensuing events. And I think it is worth noting that we are not unprepared 
for the subtext of the casket scene, since it had been directly conveyed to us 
earlier by Jessica and Lorenzo in their elopement scene:

25
16                                           Harry Berger Jr. 


         Jess. Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
       I  am glad ’tis night—you do not look on me—
       For I  am much asham’d of my exchange.
       But  love is blind, and lovers cannot see
       Th e pretty follies that themselves commit;
       For if  they could, Cupid himself would blush
       To see me thus transformed to a boy.
         Lor. Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.
         Jess. What, must I hold a candle to my shames?
       Th ey in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
       Why, ’tis an oﬃ  ce of discovery, love—
       And  I should be obscur’d.
           (II.vi.33–44)


If these lines were engrossed in a plaque over the casket scene they would 
describe both the scenario Portia eschews when she says she will never be 
forsworn (III.ii.11–12) and the psychological conditions which would enable 
her to drop clues without  being forsworn, letting  blind Fortune  go to hell 
for it. She will not descend to being Bassanio’s torchbearer, holding a candle 
to her  shames, and risking the  obscurity of  being his  page and servant, 
his “boy,” for life.5 Whatever she and Bassanio do will be obscured in the 
blindness born when fancy—desire and self-deception—is engendered in 
the eye.
       During  the remainder of the play, Portia uses her wit to defend against 
the weakness for Bassanio which threatens to betray her into the power of the 
Royal Merchant Adventurers Club of Venice. Released from the bondage of 
her father’s will into that of her own, she immediately goes to work to estab-
lish control over both herself and Bassanio. She does this by ostentatiously 
relinquishing control:


             But now I  was the lord
       Of  this fair mansion, master of my servants,
       Queen o’er myself; and even now, but now,
       Th is house, these servants, and this same myself
       Are  yours, my lord’s.
           (III.ii.167–71)


So free and generous a gift  is nevertheless carefully itemized  to  remind 
him  of her value and  worth,  and hence of his  obligation.  He comes, he 
says, like one contending for a prize, “to give and to receive”; she only gives, 
and gives him  all,  and with  a  flair  for  self-advertisement that  lays him 

26
                      Marriage and Mercifixion in The Merchant of Venice        17


under a burden of gratitude beyond his means to discharge. She then uses 
the additional  gift  of the ring  to  convert this first  gift   to a loan, a bond, 
which can be  forfeit,  but even in  imposing  that qualification   she brings 
it off  as still another generous act. She is a Christian, and she knows the 
power of the charity that  wounds.
       When  she regains the ring in the ﬁ fth act, the thematic resemblances to 
Much Ado become quite noticeable, and Portia’s advantage is like that of the 
conquering Hero in Act V. She teases Bassanio about man’s inconstancy, and 
threatens to be as unfaithful as he was. Th e fact that he gave the ring to a man 
rather than a woman may seem to clear him, but actually it points toward a 
more dangerous tendency. Th e act of giving the ring to a man may have the 
same value as that of giving it to another woman in return for favors, since 
both acts indicate man’s assumption that men are superior to women, that it 
is men who save each other and the world and who perform great deeds and 
sacriﬁ ces; the pledge to a woman can be superseded by the debt of gratitude 
owed a man. Once again we see how a culture dominated by the masculine 
imagination devalues women and asserts male solidarity against feminine 
eﬀ orts to breach the barrier. In her own way, Portia is no less an outsider 
than Shylock, and her “I stand for sacriﬁ ce” is ﬁ nally not much diﬀ erent from 
Shylock’s “I stand for judgment.”
       If  Shylock practices usury, Portia is the master mistress of negative usury. 
Usury, stripped of its subtleties, amounts to getting more than you give. Neg-
ative usury is giving more than you get. More eﬃ  cient than Jewish or Chris-
tian fatherhood, it works like Jewish motherhood to sink hooks of gratitude 
and obligation deep into the beneﬁ ciary’s bowels. Against Antonio’s failure 
to get himself cruciﬁ ed, we can place Portia’s divine power of merciﬁ xion; she 
never rains but she pours. “Fair Ladies,” says the admiring Lorenzo, “you drop 
manna in the way / Of starved people” (V.i.294–95). But the manna melts in 
Bassanio’s mouth before he can swallow it. Confronted with his surrender of 
the ring, he ﬂ inches, pleads necessity, is forced to his knees (like Shylock), and 
is made to promise he will behave. Th is gives Antonio one last chance to com-
pete with Portia by rescuing Bassanio from blame, but she foils that by mak-
ing him  the intermediary who formally  returns the ring and bids Bassanio 
“keep it better than the other.” Th en in another divine shower, she merciﬁ es 
Antonio by giving him  back his life and living. Th e last vestige of his power 
over Bassanio is thus happily ended, and the age of good neighbors restored.
       If  Dogberry  had been standing by, he would have been ready with an 
appropriate comment: “God save the foundation! . . . God keep your wor-
ship! . . . God restore you to health! I humbly give you leave to depart. And 
[turning now to Portia and Bassanio] if a merry ending may be wished, God 
prohibit it!” An  amiable constabularial farewell: Come, neighbors.

27
18                                                Harry  Berger Jr. 


                                                         Notes

        1. “The Loss of Men and Getting of Children:  ‘All’s Well  that Ends Well’ and 
‘Measure for Measure,’ ” Modern Language Review, 73 (1978), 18.
        2. The Merchant of Venice and all other plays are quoted from the Penguin edi-
tion of William  Shakespeare: The Complete Works, gen. ed. Alfred Harbage (London: 
The Penguin Press, 1969).
        3. Shakespeare Quarterly, 21 (1970), 109.
        4. For a recent argument against either or both of these views, and a return—
unpersuasive, in my opinion—to a more traditional reading of the play, see Lawrence 
Danson, The Harmonies of “The Merchant of Venice” (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 
1978).
        5.  Lorenzo’s  earlier  comment,  while  making   even clearer the   difference 
between Jessica and Portia, still spells out both  the outcome she desires and the 
page-like subservience she fears:

                  she hath directed
            How  I shall take her from her father’s house,
            What  gold and jewels she is furnished with,
            What  page’s suit she hath in readiness.
                 (II.iv.29–32)

28
                                 CoPPélIA          KAHn


                 The  Cuckoo’s   Note:   Male    Friendship  
         and   Cuckoldry     in   The   Merchant       of   Venice




Shakespeare’s romantic comedies center on courtship, a holiday of jokes, 
disguisings, songs, word play, and merriment of many kinds, which culmi-
nates in marriage, the everyday institution which both inspires holiday and 
sets the boundaries of it. Shakespeare doesn’t portray the quotidian realities 
of marriage in these comedies, of course. He simply lets marriage symbol-
ize the ideal accommodation of eros with society, and the continuation of 
both lineage and personal identity into posterity. Yet at the same time he 
never fails to undercut this ideal. In The Merchant of Venice he goes farther 
than in the other comedies to imply that marriage is a state in which men 
and women “atone together,” as Hymen says in As You Like It. Rather than 
concluding with a wedding dance as he does in A Midsummer Night’s Dream 
or Much Ado About Nothing, a wedding masque like that in As You Like It, 
or a combination of family reunion, recognition scene, and troth plighting 
as in Twelfth Night, he ends Merchant with a combat of wits between men 
and women, a nervous flurry of accusations and denials, bawdy innuendos 
and threats of castration, which make up the final episode of a subplot 
rather than rounding off the main plot by celebrating marriage. Commonly 
referred to as “the ring plot,” this intrigue may seem trivial, but is actually 
entwined with the main courtship plot from the middle of the play, and 



From Shakespeare’s “Rough Magic”: Renaissance Essays in Honor of C. L. Barber, edited by Peter 
Erickson and Coppélia Kahn, pp. 104–12. Copyright © 1985 by Associated University 
Presses.

                                                   19

29
20                                           Coppélia Kahn


accomplishes more than one darker purpose on which the romantic moon-
light of Belmont does not fall.1
       To begin with, Shakespeare structures the ring plot so as to parallel and 
contrast Antonio and Portia as rivals for Bassanio’s aﬀ ection, bringing out a 
conﬂ ict between male friendship and marriage which runs throughout his 
works.2 As Janet Adelman points out in her penetrating essay on the early 
comedies, same sex friendships in Shakespeare (as in the typical life cycle) 
are chronologically and psychologically prior to marriage. “Th e complications 
posed by male identity and male friendship,” she argues, rather than heavy 
fathers or irrational laws, provide the most dramatically and emotionally sig-
niﬁ cant obstacles to marriage in Th e Comedy of Errors, Th e Two Gentlemen of 
Verona, Th e Taming of a Shrew, and Love’s Labor’s Lost.3 In these plays, Shake-
speare tends toward what Adelman calls “magical solutions,” facile twists 
of plot and changes of character in which the heroes are enabled to pursue 
friendships with other men while also contracting relationships with women, 
even though these relationships jeopardize or conﬂ ict with their earlier ties 
with men. Merchant, I think, is perhaps the ﬁ rst play in which Shakespeare 
avoids this kind of magical solution and gives probing attention to the conﬂ ict 
between the two kinds of bonds, and to the psychological needs they satisfy.
       Second, the ring plot comes to rest on the idea of cuckoldry, a theme as 
persistent in the comedies as that of male friendship. Bonds with men pre-
cede marriage and interfere with it; cuckoldry, men fear, follows marriage and 
threatens it. I wish to demonstrate the interdependence of these two motifs. 
First, though, it may be helpful to summarize the ring plot.
       Articulated  in three scenes, it begins at the very moment of Portia’s and 
Bassanio’s betrothal, after he has correctly chosen the lead casket. As Portia 
formally surrenders lordship over her mansion, her servants, and herself to 
Bassanio, she gives him a ring, enjoining him not to part with it. If he does, she 
cautions, he will bring their love to ruin and give her cause to reproach him. 
Th e next turn of the plot occurs during Shylock’s trial. When there appears to 
be no recourse from the payment of the pound of ﬂ esh, Bassanio declares that 
though his wife be dear to him “as life itself,” he would sacriﬁ ce her (and his 
own life) to save his friend. Portia in her lawyer’s robes drily remarks, “Your 
wife would give you little thanks for that /  If  she were by to hear you make 
the oﬀ er” (4.1.28–85).4 Th us Shakespeare establishes a motive for the trick 
the wives play on their husbands: they want to teach them a lesson about the 
primacy of their  marital obligations over obligations to  their male friends. 
Next, the rings reappear at the end of the trial scene. When Bassanio oﬀ ers 
the lawyer “some remembrance” for his services, the disguised Portia asks for 
the ring, and persists in asking for it even when Bassanio protests,

30
      The Cuckoo’s Note: Male Friendship and Cuckoldry in The Merchant of Venice 21


       Good  sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
       And  when she put it on, she made me vow
       Th at I should neither sell, nor give, nor lose it.
           (4.1.437–39)


At  this  point,  it  would  seem that Bassanio has passed the test his wife 
devised: he knows how to value her ring. A moment later, though, at Anto-
nio’s urging he gives the ring away. Finally, reunited with  their  husbands, 
Portia and Nerissa demand the rings (which, of  course, they still have) as 
proof of fidelity. Pretending to believe that Bassanio and Gratiano gave the 
tokens to Venetian mistresses, while the men try to defend themselves the 
women threaten retaliation in the  form of  cuckoldry. All  the while,  we as 
audience are in on the joke, titillated,  but reminded  by numerous double-
entendres that the doctor and his clerk, whom Portia  and Nerissa pretend 
to regard as fictions concocted by their guilty husbands, are in fact the two 
wives, who know better than anyone that their husbands are blameless.
       Two  complementary anxieties run through this  intrigue: that  men, if 
they are to marry, must renounce their friendships with each other—must 
even, perhaps, betray them; and that once they are married, their wives will 
betray them. Each anxiety constitutes a threat to the men’s sense of them-
selves as men. In Shakespeare’s psychology, men ﬁ rst seek to mirror them-
selves in a homoerotic attachment (the Antipholi   in Th e Comedy of Errors 
oﬀ er the best example of this state) and then to conﬁ rm themselves through 
diﬀ erence, in a bond with the opposite sex—the marital bond, which gives 
them exclusive possession of a woman.5 As I have argued elsewhere, the very 
exclusiveness of this possession puts Shakespeare’s male characters at risk; 
their honor, on which  their  identities depend so deeply, is irrevocably lost 
if they suﬀ er the peculiarly galling shame of being cuckolded.6 Th e double 
standard by which their inﬁ delities are tolerated and women’s are inexcus-
able conceals the liability of betrayal by women. In fact, the ring  plot  as a 
whole can be viewed as a kind of cadenza inspired by a bawdy story in  a 
Tudor jestbook, the point of  which is that  the only way a jealous husband 
can be wholly assured of not being cuckolded is  to keep his ﬁ nger in his 
wife’s “ring.” Th e joke stresses both the intense fear of cuckoldry of which 
men are capable, and the folly of such fear.7
       Until   the trial  scene, it might seem that Shakespeare is preparing for 
a fairy-tale conclusion, in which both Antonio’s and Portia’s claims on Bas-
sanio could be satisﬁ ed. Th ough they are paralleled and contrasted with each 
other (for example, both enter the play with a sigh expressing an inexplicable 
sadness, Antonio puzzling “In sooth I know not why I am so sad,” and Portia 

31
22                                           Coppélia Kahn


declaring, “By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world”), 
neither the friend nor the beloved behaves competitively at ﬁ rst.8 When Bas-
sanio needs money to court Portia, Antonio’s purse is his; when he needs it (as 
it seems at one point) to rescue Antonio, Portia’s wealth is at his disposal. But 
when Antonio’s ships fail to return and his bond with Shylock falls due, he 
sends a heartrending letter to Bassanio which arrives, signiﬁ cantly, just when 
he and Portia are pledging their love, and prevents them from consummating 
their marriage. Bassanio’s two bonds of love, one with a man, the other with a 
woman, are thus brought into conﬂ ict. Portia immediately oﬀ ers Bassanio her 
fortune to redeem his friend, but remarks, “Since you are dear bought, I will 
love you dear” (3.2.312), calling attention to her generosity and his indebted-
ness. In contrast, Antonio’s letter reads,


       Sweet Bassanio, . . . all debts are clear’d between you and I, if 
       I  might but see you at my death: notwithstanding, use your 
       pleasure,—if your love do not persuade you to come, let not my 
       letter.
           (3.2.317–20)


As others have noted, the generosity of both rivals is actually an attempt “to 
sink hooks of gratitude and obligation deep into the beneficiary’s bowels.”9
       At  the trial, Bassanio’s implicit conﬂ ict of obligations comes out in the 
open when, in language far more impassioned than that he used when he won 
Portia, he declares he would give her life for his friend’s:


       Antonio,  I am married to a wife
       Which  is as dear to me as life itself,
       But  life itself, my wife, and all the world,
       Are  not with me esteem’d above thy life.
       I  would lose all, ay sacriﬁ ce them all
       Here to  this devil, to deliver you.
           (4.1.278–83)


How neatly ironic that, in successfully urging Bassanio to give away Portia’s 
ring, Antonio  actually helps her to carry out her plot against her erring hus-
band: again, the two claims are irreconcilable, and the friend’s gives place to 
the wife’s. “Let . . . my love withal /  Be valued ‘gainst your wife’s comman-
dement,” pleads Antonio, making the contest perfectly explicit (4.1.455–46). 
In the final  scene, Shakespeare maintains the tension between the friend’s 
claim and the wife’s until Antonio offers to pledge a pound of his flesh that 
his friend  “Will   never more break faith”;  only then  does Portia drop her 

32
       The Cuckoo’s Note: Male Friendship and Cuckoldry in The Merchant of Venice 23


ruse, when Antonio   offers  to sacrifice  himself  once again.  Thus  Shakespeare 
suggests that  marriage  will   triumph   over friendship   between  men.
        Nevertheless,  it  takes a strong, shrewd  woman like  Portia  to  combat the 
continuing   appeal of such ties  between men.  At  ﬁ rst, her power  derives from 
her father;  the  wealth  he bequeathed and  the challenge  he devised  make her 
a magnet,  drawing  nobles  from   all  over Europe   who  hazard  all  to  win  her. 
Th ough in her  opening  scene Portia  sees herself as caught in  the  constraints 
of her father’s  will,  Shakespeare soon makes it  clear that  she has a will  of  her 
own. In   her merrily   stinging   put-downs   of  the  suitors,  wit  and  verbal force 
substitute for  sexual force and prerogative—as  they also do when  she prompts 
Bassanio to  choose the  right   casket, when  she manipulates  the  letter  of  the 
law, and when  she uses the ring to  get the  upper hand  over her  husband.
        Portia’s  masculine  disguise, however,  also produces  the  suggestion  that 
she is not just  a clever woman,  but  something  of  a man as well.  For example, 
when  Bassanio protests  concerning   the ring,  “No   woman  had  it,  but  a civil 
doctor”  (5.1.210),  or when  Portia  jokes, “For  by  this ring   the doctor  lay  with 
me” (5.1.259), it  is as though images of her  as male and as female are superim-
posed. When  Portia  shares her plans for  disguise  with  Nerissa, she says their 
husbands “shall  think   we  are accomplished   with   that  we  lack” (3.4.61–62), 
slyly suggesting  not a complete  physical  transformation   from  female  to male, 
but the  discrete  addition   of  a phallus  to  the womanly   body. Th e line  carries 
two implications,   at  least. One is that  the  phallus symbolizes  not  just  mascu-
linity  per se but the real  power to  act in  the world   which  masculinity   confers. 
Th e arguments she presents as Dr. Bellario would  have little  force if  she deliv-
ered them  as Portia, a lady of  Belmont.   Another  implication    is that  Portia  as 
androgyne  is a fantasy  ﬁ gure who  resolves the  conﬂ ict  between  homoerotic 
and heterosexual  ties,  like  the  “woman   . . . ﬁ rst created”  of  sonnet  20,  who 
is also “pricked   out.”   As  the  concluding   episode  of  the  ring  plot   proceeds, 
however, the  double-entendres    about  Portia’s  double  gender  become  mere 
embellishments  to  the action,  in which  she uses her speciﬁ cally female power 
as wife to establish  her priority   over  Antonio   and her  control  over Bassanio.
        Th e power is based on the threat  of cuckoldry,  the other  strand  of mean-
ing woven  into   the ring  plot.  When   Portia  gives  the ring  to  her  future  hus-
band, she says,


        Th is house, these servants, and this  same myself
        Are  yours,—my   lord’s!—I  give  them  with  this  ring,
        Which   when  you part  from,  lose, or  give away,
        Let  it  presage the  ruin  of your  love,
        And   be my vantage to  exclaim  on you.
            (3.2.170–74)

33
24                                           Coppélia Kahn


Portia’s gift limits  the generosity of her love by a stringent  condition. She 
gives all to her bridegroom; he in turn must keep her ring, or their love will 
turn to “ruin.”  This ominous note recalls another Shakespearean love token, 
the handkerchief  Othello  gives Desdemona. He  calls it  a “recognizance 
and pledge of love,” but as he describes its history, it seems not so much the 
symbol of an existing love as a charm on which the continuation of that love 
magically depends. The handkerchief was first used to “subdue” Othello’s 
father to his mother’s love, and Othello hints  that it  should have the same 
effect on him when he warns, in  lines reminiscent of Portia’s, “To lose, or 
give’t away were such perdition / As nothing else could match” (3.4.53–66). 
However, Portia’s ring  has less to  do  with  magic  than  with  rights  and 
obligations. Unlike  Othello,  she is concerned more with “vantage,” which 
the OED  defines as gain or profit, than with  some vaguer “ruin.” She sees 
marriage as a contract of sexual fidelity equally binding on both parties, for 
their mutual “vantage.”
       On  one level, the ring obviously represents the marriage bond, as it does 
in the wedding ceremony. But on another, it bears a speciﬁ cally sexual mean-
ing alluded to in the play’s ﬁ nal lines, spoken by Gratiano: “Well, while I live, 
I’ll  fear no other thing /  So sore as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring” (5.1.306–7). 
Rings, circles, and O’s are frequently, in Shakespeare’s works and elsewhere, 
metaphors for female sexual parts.10 In the last scene, speaking to Bassa-
nio, Portia refers to the ring as “your wife’s ﬁ rst gift” (5.2.166), that is, her 
virginity. In giving  Bassanio her “ring,” Portia gives him her virginity, and a 
husband’s traditionally exclusive sexual rights to her. In All’s Well Th at Ends 
Wel l , Diana voices the same metaphorical equation when Bertram compares 
his masculine honor to the ring  he wears: “Mine honor’s such a ring,” she 
replies; “My chastity’s the jewel of our house” (4.2.45–46).11 When Bassanio 
accepts the ring from his bride, he vows to keep it on his ﬁ nger or die. Again, 
the two meanings, proper and bawdy, come into play. He promises to be faith-
ful to his wife, and also to keep her sexuality under his control—by keeping 
her “ring” on his “ﬁ nger.”
       When  Bassanio’s passionate outburst in the trial scene reveals the inten-
sity of his friendship with  Antonio, Portia feels threatened, and later retali-
ates with the only weapon at a wife’s command: the threat of inﬁ delity. In a 
turnabout of the conventional metaphor for female chastity, she declares that 
her supposed rival “hath got the jewel that  I love”—the  ring, representing 
her husband’s sexual favors and his ﬁ delity. She continues with an even more 
unorthodox assertion of sexual equality:


       I  will  become as liberal as you,
       I’ll  not  deny him anything I have,

34
      The Cuckoo’s Note: Male Friendship and Cuckoldry in The Merchant of Venice 25


       No, not my body, nor my husband’s bed:
       Know  him I shall, I am well sure of it.
           (5.1.226–29)


Refusing to honor the  double standard on which the  whole idea of cuck-
oldry  depends, and refusing to  overlook  her husband’s supposed sexual 
fault, she threatens to seize a comparable sexual freedom for herself. One 
facet of Shakespeare’s genius is his perception that men don’t see women 
as they are, but project onto them certain needs and fears instilled by our 
culture. He and a few other writers stand apart in being critically aware that 
these distorted but deeply felt conceptions of women can be distinguished 
from women themselves—their behavior, their feelings, their desires. From 
Portia’s point of  view, women aren’t inherently fickle,   as misogyny holds 
them to  be;  rather, they  practice betrayal  defensively, in  retaliation  for 
comparable injuries.
       Th e ring plot culminates in ﬁ ctions: though Bassanio did give Portia’s 
ring away, in fact he wasn’t unfaithful to her as she claims he was, and though 
she threatens revenge she clearly never intends to carry it out. Th is transparent 
ﬁ ctitiousness makes the intrigue like a fantasy—a story we make up to play 
out urges on which we fear to act. In terms of fantasy, Bassanio does betray 
Portia, both by sleeping with another woman and by loving Antonio. Portia, 
in turn,  does get back at him, by  cuckolding him. At   the level of fantasy, 
Shakespeare seems to imply that male friendship continues to compete with 
marriage even after the nuptial knot is tied, and that men’s fears of cuckoldry 
may be rooted in an awareness that they deserve to be punished for failing to 
honor marriage vows in the spirit as well as in the letter.
       René Girard has argued that the binary oppositions on which the play 
seems to be built—Christian versus Jew, realism versus romance, the spirit ver-
sus the letter, and so on, collapse into symmetry and reciprocity. Girard holds 
that, though “Th e Venetians appear diﬀ erent from Shylock, up to a point,”


       Th ey do not live by the law of charity, but this law is enough of a 
       presence in their language to drive the law of revenge underground, 
       to  make this  revenge almost invisible. As a  result, this revenge 
       becomes more  subtle, skillful,  and  feline  than  the  revenge of 
       Shylock.12


By trivializing   serious issues into jokes which rest on playful fictions, the 
ring plot serves to disguise the extent to which the Venetians do resemble 
Shylock. But  it  also articulates serious issues; in it  as in  the  main plot, 
ironic  similarities   between Jew and  Christian   abound. Portia’s  gift   to 

35
26                                           Coppélia Kahn


Bassanio seems innocent, like Shylock’s “merry bond,” but it too is used to 
catch a Venetian on the hip and feed a grudge. Her vow of revenge through 
cuckoldry parallels Shylock’s in  his “Hath   not a Jew eyes?” speech: both 
justify revenge on the grounds that  what their  adversaries denounce they 
actually practice. Just as in the trial   Portia pleads for the  spirit  of mercy 
but actually takes revenge against Shylock through the letter of the law, so 
her original professions of boundless love are undercut by her later desire to 
even the sexual score. As Shylock says, “These be the Christian husbands!” 
(4.1.291). He was once a husband, too, and pledged his love to Leah with a 
ring—a pledge dishonored (so far as we know) only by his daughter when 
she turned Christian.
       Finally, though, the ring  plot emphasizes sexual diﬀ erences more than 
it undercuts social and moral ones. It portrays a tug of war in which women 
and men compete—for the aﬀ ections of men. Bassanio’s ﬁ nal lines recapitu-
late the progression from homoerotic bonds to the marital  bond ironically 
aﬃ  rmed through cuckoldry which the action of the ring plot implies:


       Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow,—
       When  I am absent then lie with my wife.
           (5.1.284–85)


Similarly,  the very  last lines in   the play, spoken by  Gratiano,  voice the 
homoerotic wish, succeeded by the heterosexual anxiety:


       But  were the day come, I should wish it dark,
       Till   I were couching with the doctor’s clerk.
       Well, while I  live, I’ll fear no other thing,
       So sore, as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring.
           (5.1.304–7)


                                                   Notes

         1. Norman Rabkin has written perceptively about the ring plot as one of many 
“signals” in The Merchant of Venice which “create discomfort, point to centrifugal-
ity.” See his Shakespeare and the Problem of Meaning (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1981), p. 29. Interesting essays on the ring plot are: Marilyn L. Williamson, 
“The Ring Episode in The Merchant of Venice,” South Atlantic Quarterly 71 (1972): 
587–94; James E. Siemon, “The Merchant of Venice: Act V as Ritual Reiteration,” 
Studies in Philosophy 67 (1970): 201–9. For an interpretation centering on Portia’s 
power and how the ring plot resolves its threat to male dominance, see Anne Parten, 
“Re-establishing the Sexual Order: The Ring Episode in The Merchant of Venice,” 
Women Studies 9, no. 1 (Spring 1982), Special Issue on Feminist Criticism of Shake-
speare II, ed. Gayle Greene and Carolyn Swift: 145–56. While I share her view 
that cuckoldry is “a particularly disturbing specter which is bound up with the idea 

36
       The Cuckoo’s Note: Male Friendship and Cuckoldry in The Merchant of Venice 27


of female ascendancy” (pp. 149–50), we disagree about how the ring plot represents 
this specter. She holds that, by making explicit the male anxieties which cuckoldry 
inspires and then exposing them as “only a game” (p. 150), it dispels those anxiet-
ies; I believe that by voicing them loudly in  the final  scene, in lieu of conventional 
conclusions which celebrate marriage, the ring plot seriously undermines any comic 
affirmation  of marriage. For a reading of the final  scene as Portia’s way of getting 
back at Antonio, see Leslie Fiedler, “The Jew As Stranger,” in The Stranger in Shake-
speare (New York: Stein and Day, 1972), esp. pp. 134–36.
          2.  Others have commented on the triangulated  rivalry which  the ring  plot 
brings out. In  her  introduction  to The Merchant of Venice in The Riverside Shake-
speare, ed. G. Blakemore Evans (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin,   1974), Anne Barton 
notes that the ring plot  is “a test which forces Bassanio to weigh his obligations to 
his wife against those to his friend and to recognize the latent antagonism between 
them” (p.  253). Leonard  Tennenhouse, in “The   Counterfeit  Order  of The Mer-
chant of Venice,” in Representing Shakespeare: New Psychoanalytic Essays, ed. Murray 
Schwartz and Coppélia Kahn (Baltimore:  Johns Hopkins University  Press, 1980), 
observes that “This test of Bassanio’s fidelity to Portia becomes, at Antonio’s insis-
tence, a test of Bassanio’s love for Antonio”  (p. 62). Lawrence W.  Hyman,  “The 
Rival Loves in The Merchant of Venice,” Shakespeare Quarterly 21 no. 2 (Spring 1970): 
109–16, sees the main action of the play as a struggle between Portia and Antonio 
for Bassanio, and interprets  Antonio’s bond  with  Shylock as a metaphor for  the 
bond of love between him and Bassanio. See also Robert W. Hapgood, “Portia and 
The Merchant of Venice: The Gentle Bond,” MLQ 28, no. 1 (March  1967): 19–32; 
on the ring plot,  pp. 26–29.
          3. Janet Adelman, “Male Bonding in Shakespeare’s Comedies.” 
          4. This  and all subsequent quotations from Merchant are taken from the new 
Arden edition  of  The Merchant of Venice, ed. John Russell Brown (1955; reprint, 
London: Methuen; Cambridge: Harvard  University Press, 1961, 1966).
          5. Peter Erickson deals extensively with the psychology of homoerotic bonds 
in Shakespeare in his book Patriarchal Structures in Shakespeare’s Drama, . . . from the 
University of  California  Press. See also Shirley Nelson Garner’s interesting treat-
ment of this theme in “A Midsummer Night’s Dream: ‘Jack shall have Jill; / Nought 
shall go ill,’ ” Feminist Studies 9, no. 1 (1981), Special Issue on Feminist Criticism of 
Shakespeare I, ed. Gayle Greene and Carolyn Lenz: 47–64.
          6. See my book Man’s Estate: Masculine Identity in Shakespeare (Berkeley and 
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1981), passim, but esp. chap. 4.
          7. The  story can be found  in  Tales and Quick Answers (1530), reprinted in 
Shakespeare’s Jestbook (Chiswick: C. Wittingham, 1814), p. 14.
          8. There is a hint,  however, that Antonio’s sadness is caused by the prospect 
of Bassanio’s marriage. When noting Antonio’s mood, Gratiano comments that he 
is “marvelously chang’d” (1.1.76), and a few lines later we learn that Bassanio had 
earlier promised to tell him  about a vow to make “a secret pilgrimage” to a certain 
lady (1.1.119–20).
          9. The  phrase is Harry Berger’s in “Marriage  and Mercifixion   in The Mer-
chant of Venice: The Casket Scene Revisited,” Shakespeare Quarterly 32, no. 2 (Sum-
mer 1981): 161, and describes what he regards as Portia’s attempt to control Bassanio 
by giving him  the ring.  Regarding the secret agenda behind Antonio’s generosity, 
see Robert Hapgood, cited in n. 2: “Antonio is at once too generous and too posses-
sive. . . . He wants Bassanio to see him die for his sake” (p. 261).

37
28                                                 Coppélia Kahn


        10. See David Willbern, “Shakespeare’s Nothing,” in Representing Shakespeare: 
New Psychoanalytic Essays, cited in n. 2, and the story cited in n. 7.
        11. This quotation is taken from the new Arden edition of All’s Well That Ends 
Well, ed. G.  K.  Hunter  (1959; reprint,  London:  Methuen;  Cambridge:  Harvard 
University Press, 1962).
        12. René Girard, “ ‘To Entrap the Wisest’: A Reading of The Merchant of Ven-
ice,” in Textual Strategies: Perspectives in Post-Structuralist Criticism, ed. Josué Harari 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1979), pp. 100–119.

38
                                  RiChARd           A.   Levin


                                        Portia’s     Belmont







Shylock    is a product  of forces in  venice and as a mirror  image of  that 
city. One  might  concede some degree of likeness between Shylock  and 
Christian  venice,  however, and  still  hold  that  Christian   venice  comes 
closer to  an ideal  fully  expressed in Belmont.   The  nature of  Belmont, 
then, is crucial to one’s interpretation of The Merchant of Venice. is Belmont 
best seen as an expression of a culture’s highest values or as a suburban 
retreat for the  privileged? The  latter alternative  has been gaining adher-
ents, partly because contemporary interest in the outsider in Shakespeare 
creates unease about the plight of Shylock at Portia’s hands in  act 4 and 
the marginal  status she imposes on Antonio  in  act 5.1 Portia’s assertion 
of authority  is, i believe, at the heart  of the play; it  allows one to see that 
not until  the end are the dual questions settled: who will be admitted into 
society, and on what terms? in answering these questions, the play reveals 
that life  in Belmont,  no less than life in  venice, is shaped by the struggle 
for position.
       Through Launcelot Shakespeare indicates the continuity between venice 
and Belmont. in venice, when Bassanio took Launcelot into service, in an ebul-
lient mood he bid Jessica, the Jewess, farewell. When Launcelot first appears 
in Belmont, however, his fortunes are in temporary eclipse: in the absence of 
Portia and his master, Lorenzo and Jessica have authority in the household. 


From Love and Society in Shakespearean Comedy: A Study of Dramatic Form and Content, pp. 
53–85, 178–79. Copyright © 1985 by Associated University Presses.


                                                        29

39
30                                               Richard A. Levin


Resentfully, Launcelot   jests at  Jessica’s expense. She is damned, he  tells  her, 
by virtue  of her  birth;  she is either  the Jew Shylock’s  daughter, or else she is a 
bastard (3.5.1–18).  Moreover,  Jews ought not  to  convert, because in  doing  so 
they “raise the price  of hogs” (24).  Launcelot  implies  that  society has a limited 
number of  privileges  to oﬀ er, so that the  success of one person implies anoth-
er’s failure. Marginally   situated as Launcelot  is, he tries to  reaﬃ  rm his right  to 
belong by  declaring  Jessica the outsider. Th e question, then, is  whether  those 
more advantageously placed in Belmont   are as competitive as Launcelot.
        Th e answer to  this  question  is  complex.  A  privileged  life   has room  for 
generosity;  thus, just  as Christian    Venice is  sometimes  gracious  when  Shy-
lock  is  not,  so Belmont   can  rise  superior  to  Venice.  However,   even at  the 
pinnacle  of society  Portia  feels herself  the  outsider  among  herself,  Bassanio, 
and Antonio.   Th e privileged, and Portia  preeminently,  also have the  power  to 
protect their  own  interests. Portia,  for  example, is poised, charming,  and well-
connected; she proves able to set the terms  that  others must  accept, if they are 
to end up  with  any portion   of  the pie.
        It  is not  simply  because competition   takes subtle forms  at Belmont   that 
the  action  there  often  seems the  best  evidence  that  Th e Merchant is  genu-
inely  romantic   comedy. Th e casket plot,  in  which   a suitor   must  choose the 
right   casket to  win   Portia,  comes  right   out  of  romance  and  is  at  the  fur-
thest  remove from   actual  social  practices. I  believe,  however, that  even  this 
plot  can  be interpreted,   symbolically   at  least, as an  antiromantic    comment 
on social  reality.  We  will   approach  such an  understanding   of  this  plot   and 
of Belmont   in  general  by analyzing  Portia’s  development.  Even  when  she is 
introduced,  in  1.2, she possesses shortcomings sometimes  to be found  in  one 
of her  privileged  class and  background:  ennui,  intolerance  for  outsiders,  and 
moral  complacency. Her   present circumstances  have  already begun  to  make 
her aware that  she has interests to protect;  later, when  the  veil falls fully   from 
her eyes, she discovers, and we with her, that  the struggle  for  position  contin-
ues unabated in  Belmont.


                                                            *  *  *


The  scene opens with   Portia  complaining,    “By  my  troth,  Nerissa,  my  little 
body is  a-weary  of this  great  world.”   One  is inclined   to  be sympathetic,   for 
although   we have  not  yet  heard  how  the  will    of  Portia’s  father  limits   her 
freedom,  her words  recall Antonio’s   melancholy  at  the play’s outset.  Nerissa, 
however,  puts  Portia’s  predicament   in  a different   light.   To   Nerissa,  Portia 
“surfeits”  with   too   much  and  her  “good  fortunes”   far  outweigh   her  miser-
ies. Nerissa reveals  Portia  as an immensely  privileged   woman,   whose “great 
world”   is  a  palace  and  whose  troubles  are,  at  most,   momentary.   Nerissa 

40
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        31


advises Portia that those who possess mere “competency” are often happier 
than those with “superfluity”;  Portia  should learn to be content with what 
she has (8–9).
       Portia  laconically replies, “Good sentences, and well pronounc’d” (10); 
she elaborates after Nerissa insists that Portia should follow the advice she 
has been given. Portia pours forth a stream of sententious wisdom to  the 
eﬀ ect that there is all the diﬀ erence in the world between giving good advice 
and following it. Th e implication seems to be that one ought to accept the 
way of the world and not have compunctions about falling short of ideals.
       Th ere is another implication, too, one directed at Nerissa; it  is heard 
most strongly in the ﬁ rst of Portia’s gnomic utterances:


       If  to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels 
       had been churches, and poor men’s cottages princes’ palaces. 
       (1.2.12–14)


Portia nudges her lady-in-waiting back into place, saying, in effect, that the 
poor would like to be rich, and if they were, they would behave precisely as 
the rich do. Portia is unapologetic about her privileges.
       It  is at this  point that  Portia ﬁ rst mentions her father’s will. She ﬁ nds 
it “hard” not to have choice, and complains that her own “will”—that is, her 
volition—is constrained by her father’s “will” (24–26). Portia wittily sums up 
her predicament and inclines the viewer in her favor. If she is indeed commit-
ted to adhering to the will, then she has simply been letting oﬀ  steam. And 
yet her real intentions are still hidden, for at this point only Nerissa endorses 
the scheme contrived by Portia’s father. Before hearing Portia again on the 
will, attention  shifts: Nerissa oﬀ ers to name the suitors who have already 
arrived, while Portia’s comments will reveal her “aﬀ ection” for them.
       Portia’s tart remarks about her suitors perhaps reveal only an impres-
sively spirited young lady, doing what she can to pass her time and Nerissa’s 
under arduous circumstances: she is encroached upon by suitors not at all to 
her liking. A harsher judgment is also possible. Portia continues to reveal the 
limitations characteristic of her class and background. For example, Portia 
mocks all her suitors even though she knows “it is a sin to be a mocker” (57): 
she still shows no compunction about failing to bring her conduct into line 
with moral standards. Th en, too, Portia caricatures her suitors by employing 
foreign stereotypes.2 Th us she ﬁ nds the Englishman ludicrously outﬁ tted in 
an assortment of imported styles of dress, the German a drunkard, and the 
Scotsman a coward who depends on French backing. Such mocking may be 
standard Elizabethan fare or else the clever but brittle humor of  a woman 
who does not delve very deeply into the intrinsic merits of her suitors.

41
32                                          Richard A. Levin


       Portia’s stereotyping of the suitors helps to link her with the less attrac-
tive traits of her countrymen in Venice. As a way of aﬃ  rming her own quali-
ﬁ cations as an insider, she mocks the foreigners, much as Salerio and Solanio 
mock Antonio  as a “strange fellow.” Portia also resembles Venetians when 
she ridicules the Count Palatine because he is a “weeping philosopher” who 
does “nothing but frown” (49, 46). Her desire for amusement also recalls the 
Venetian worldlings of 1.1, and especially Gratiano, who rejects “wisdom” and 
“gravity” in favor of “mirth” and “laughter.”
       At  the end of the scene, Portia expresses two contrasting opinions that 
help conﬁ rm her link with  Venice. After Nerissa names all the suitors, she 
recalls an earlier guest, “a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither 
[to Belmont]  in  company of the  Marquis of  Montferrat”  (113–14). Portia 
also remembers this guest, Bassanio, and agrees that he was attractive. Bassa-
nio, likewise, was impressed by Portia’s appearance. Moreover, just as Bassanio 
spoke of a marriage to Portia as “fortunate,” so Portia seems to regard Bas-
sanio as a good catch; he is a well-born Venetian who traveled to Belmont in 
the company of an Italian nobleman. (Bassanio’s credentials need not include 
wealth, of course; Portia has wealth in abundance.)
       No  sooner has Portia rendered one favorable verdict for dubious reasons 
than she renders an unfavorable one for equally dubious reasons. A servant 
announcing the imminent departure of the suitors mentions the unexpected 
arrival of another, the Prince of Morocco. Th ough Portia has never met him, 
she already knows he is unwelcome: “If he have the condition of a saint, and the 
complexion of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me” (129–31). 
Th ough an Elizabethan audience might be expected to share Portia’s prejudice, 
her comment jars; she wants nothing to do with a black man, whatever his mer-
its. She unapologetically falls short of the ideals of Christian culture.
       Were Portia seen as wholeheartedly committed to respecting her father’s 
will, her faults and blemishes might be extenuated. However, her intentions 
remain obscured throughout the scene, though at one point she seems to 
declare them unambiguously: “If I live to  be as old as Sibylla, I will  die as 
chaste as Diana, unless I be obtained by the manner of my father’s will” (106–
8). Th e context of this remark is pertinent,  however. Nerissa has just told 
Portia that the detested suitors have resolved to leave unless Portia breaks the 
will. It  seems, then, that she is communicating a message designed to insure 
her guests’ departure.
       Slightly  earlier in  the scene, Portia has something rather diﬀ erent to 
say about the will. She remarks of the German suitor: If “the worst fall that 
ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him” (90–91). When Nerissa 
points out that Portia would be breaking the will if she rejected the German 
after he chose correctly, Portia suggests that Nerissa tempt him by placing 

42
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        33


“a deep glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary casket.” “I will do any thing,” 
Portia adds, “ere I will be married to a spunge.”
       Portia  seems to be hinting that  if  necessary she might be relieved of 
responsibility by Nerissa, who could take it upon herself to protect Portia’s 
interests. In this connection, note that Nerissa is kept informed by Portia of 
her opinion of all  the suitors—and potential suitors, for Bassanio’s name is 
introduced as if both Nerissa and Portia understood that he might possibly 
become a suitor.
       Th e conﬂ icting evidence about Portia’s intentions suggests that she expe-
riences opposing impulses: she feels both loyal and rebellious to her father. 
Th e circumstances of Portia’s life, as they are sketched in during this scene, 
suggest the nature of the conﬂ ict. Th us far, Portia has lived in total comfort, 
protected by her father from the world. She is a devoted daughter who half-
believes that when her father dies, the right man will magically appear to win 
her. Nevertheless, Portia senses that her father’s death fundamentally alters 
her circumstances. But for his will, she would be as free to shape her destiny 
as, for example, Olivia is in Twelfth Night. More important still, the father’s 
will  puts her into danger, potentially delivering her to  a man she will ﬁ nd 
abhorrent. It is not surprising, therefore, if some harsher elements in Portia’s 
character have begun to emerge.
       Th e scene makes one curious about the direction Portia’s development 
will take. It is not clear, for example, that respect and devotion for her father 
provide the only explanation for  her reluctance to break the will;  she may 
have less admirable motives. Consider Portia’s witty pronouncements con-
cerning this will:


       Th e brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps 
       o’er a cold decree—such a hare is madness the youth, to skip o’er 
       the meshes of good counsel the cripple. (1.2.18–21)


Portia contrasts law and license, reason and passion, and age and youth; 
though she sides with license, passion, and youth, the imagery she employs 
suggests that she understands the need for agile movement around a bar-
rier—one avoids breaking  the  law  outright.  Portia  is  the  quintessential 
insider, loath to break the law because she understands that aristocracy exists 
by virtue of law and precedent. Portia uses other legal imagery in the scene,3 
anticipating her impersonation of  a judge in a Venetian court  of law. She 
already appears to recognize the value of stealth and takes a totally unsenti-
mental view of outsiders who encroach on her life.
       Nevertheless, 1.2 conspicuously consists of conversation, not action. 
Portia has yet to take her  place on the world’s stage, and the relationship 

43
34                                          Richard A. Levin


between her words and her deeds has yet to be established. While it is pos-
sible that Portia privately discloses her settled convictions, it is likelier that 
Portia herself does not understand whether her rebelliousness and cynicism 
are anything more than a pose.
       Consider ﬁ rst matters related to her father’s will. Must this will express 
an ideal value and nothing else, or can it alternately symbolize certain realistic 
social facts? Similarly, will the casket test locate the perfect suitor, or will it 
work imperfectly, as any test would in the actual world? Th ese questions have 
obvious importance; Portia is not likely to reﬂ ect the values of a speciﬁ c class 
unless she exists in a plausible social milieu.
       Nerissa’s description of the will makes it appear as a donnée from the 
world of romance:


       Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have 
       good inspirations; therefore the lott’ry that he hath devis’d in 
       these three chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses 
       his meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any 
       rightly  but one who you shall rightly love. (1.2.27–33)


In Nerissa’s view, Portia’s father has contrived a means for bringing together 
two people perfectly in  love. As the  test unfolds, it  indeed may be inter-
preted as a conventional romance motif  testing  the purity  of  love. Each 
casket has its own  inscription.  The  gold one reads: “Who   chooseth me 
shall gain what many men desire.” The silver: “Who chooseth me shall get 
as much as he deserves.” And the lead: “Who chooseth me must give and 
hazard all he hath.” We eventually discover that the gold and silver caskets 
represent different faces of fortune. The gold one symbolizes the outright 
desire for worldly wealth or position; the  silver casket represents false self-
esteem based on one’s own fortune. Only the lead one, then, identifies a love 
not “mingled  with  regards that stands / Aloof  from  th’  entire point”  (Lr. 
1.1.239–40). Nevertheless, while granting that her father intends to identify 
true love, the morality of his scheme is still questionable.
       Portia’s silence in the face of Nerissa’s aﬃ  rmation suggests that he has 
imposed on his daughter. Th ough he seems to Nerissa to have aﬃ  rmed high 
values, he has done so at no expense to himself: the cost of his idealism is to 
be borne by his daughter. Indeed, the virtue that Nerissa ﬁ nds not only in the 
father’s will but in his whole life is subject to the same criticism. Possessed of 
almost limitless wealth, he could avoid many common moral compromises 
and safely indulge in virtuous deeds.
       Doubts  about the motives behind the will  are strengthened if it  ulti-
mately fails to function as one would expect it to in a romance. For the play 

44
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        35


to work as a romance, the intrinsic worth  of each suitor must be perfectly 
reﬂ ected in his choice of a casket; the suitors therefore must have the sim-
plicity of allegorical ﬁ gures. I shall try to show, however, that the characters 
are suﬃ  ciently “rounded” (to use Maurice Morgann’s term) and the motives 
behind their  choices suﬃ  ciently complex so that the connection between 
their merit and their fate is imperfect at best. One is free to feel that the wor-
thiest suitor does not win and that various elements that should be extraneous 
inﬂ uence the outcome of the test.
       Th e Prince of Morocco has won the sympathy of many viewers, and he 
may be the worthiest. Although Morocco chooses the gold casket, he cannot 
easily be regarded as a fortune-hunter, for his wealth and status are comparable 
with Portia’s (2.7.31–33) and in the hopes of winning her he willingly agrees 
never to woo any woman again if he fails. Moreover, a laudable motive seems 
to lie behind his choice of the gold  casket. Morocco heretofore had fought 
valorously; not satisﬁ ed with past tests of his character, however, he set out for 
Belmont. Th e reason behind his quest seems to be revealed by the motive he 
imputes to others: “All the world desires [Portia]. / From the four corners of 
the earth they come / To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint” (38–40). 
To say the least, Morocco very generously explains why so many men have 
arrived on the shores of a wealthy heiress. But the tawny Moor neither sees 
base motives in others nor possesses them himself; his choice of the gold 
casket represents not desire for wealth but homage to Portia: “Never so rich a 
gem / Was set in worse than gold” (2.7.54–55). Morocco is the play’s one true 
romantic. Moreover, discovering his wrong choice, Morocco remains digni-
ﬁ ed and leaves with a “griev’d heart,” promising to abide by his vow not to 
court again (75–76). His few blemishes, considered below, are far from seri-
ous and perhaps largely the product of his reception in Belmont.
       Th e Prince of Arragon is less admirable than Morocco. He is an “arro-
gant” Spaniard who haughtily rejects the gold  casket as the choice of the 
“fool multitude,”  and then, convinced of his own worth, chooses the silver. 
But although smug, he is not a completely negligible ﬁ gure.4 Like Morocco, 
he willingly  vows not to  woo another if  he  fails to win  Portia. Moreover, 
the inscription on the silver casket, “Who chooseth me shall get as much as 
he deserves,” strikes in him a powerful and responsive chord, and he elabo-
rates upon it with conviction: no one, he says, should “presume / To wear an 
undeserved dignity” (2.9.39–40). Arragon endorses the enlightened Tudor 
doctrine that the social hierarchy should be sensitive to merit, and his choice 
suggests that he has tried to be worthy of his rank. He opens the silver casket 
and is humiliatingly confronted with “the portrait of a blinking idiot”  (54) as 
a measure of his true worth. No doubt Arragon does fail to meet the standard 
he sets for himself—but at least he makes an eﬀ ort.

45
36                                          Richard A. Levin


       On  the other hand, the successful suitor, Bassanio, deliberately tries to 
assume an undeserved dignity by “cozening fortune.”5 Bassanio outﬁ ts a lav-
ish retinue and sends ahead to Belmont “gifts of rich value” (91) as a token 
of the wealth that  is actually only borrowed. Moreover, although Bassanio 
chooses the lead casket, his present poverty and past prodigality give reason 
for thinking that fortune is his principal motive in undertaking the courtship, 
and his interview with Portia at the opening of 3.2 does not suggest he has 
fundamentally altered. He is very much the  man with  a rented limousine, 
anxious to conduct his business and, if unsuccessful, depart. Moreover, he has 
nothing to lose, since Portia has apparently not repeated the key stipulation 
that a losing suitor must vow never to marry.
       Before Bassanio picks the lead casket, the merit of his  choice is fur-
ther eroded. Th e song Portia orders to accompany his deliberations pro-
vides him with a number of hints. Th e song warns against “fancy,” which is 
“engend’red in the eyes” and then quickly “dies” (3.2.67–68). Bassanio seems 
to infer that  the song counsels against trusting appearances, for the speech 
in which  he announces his choice begins, “So may the outward shows be 
least themselves. . . .” Th e song has also pointed towards the lead casket by 
introducing ﬁ ve “-ed” rhymes and by introducing a tolling bell, which, along 
with the references to fancy’s death, invokes “the lead in which the dead [of 
the period] were folded.”6 “In that age of anagrams and acrostics,” one critic 
observes, the song might be expected to provide Bassanio hints; another 
critic identiﬁ es Renaissance plays in which a song discloses what a charac-
ter is sworn to conceal.7
       Several of Bassanio’s earlier aphorisms on the theme of deceptive appear-
ance strike a suitably grave note, as for example, the ﬁ rst: “In law, what plea so 
tainted and corrupt / But, being season’d with a gracious voice, / Obscures the 
show of evil?” (75–77). (Th at a “gracious voice” in the courtroom can “obscure” 
evil is evident in act 4.) Soon, however, Bassanio’s examples derive from the 
woman’s toilette; she may deceive by wearing wigs, and through other arts as 
well she may manage to “veil an Indian beauty” (99). Without a trace of self-
consciousness, Bassanio has descended from a high spiritual plane to invoke 
society’s prejudice against dark-skinned people.
       Bassanio’s indiﬀ erence to spiritual values seems conﬁ rmed when, upon 
opening the casket and ﬁ nding Portia’s picture, he becomes absorbed in prais-
ing her painted likeness (115–26); when he does turn to the woman herself, 
it is her physical beauty that he notices. Finally, he reads the enclosed scroll, 
which incongruously praises him as one who “choose[s] not  by the view” 
(131). Instructed by the scroll to “claim [Portia] with  a loving kiss,” he does 
so, but with words that make his aﬀ ection doubtful. He describes himself as 
like one who has “contend[ed] in a prize”; now, “giddy” as if he were hearing 

46
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        37


applause, he wishes to have his victory “conﬁ rmed, sign’d, [and] ratiﬁ ed” by 
Portia’s kiss (148). Th ough we need not doubt that Bassanio is by this time 
infatuated with his “thrice-fair lady,” his imagery is telltale: beyond his wild-
est dreams he has achieved a preeminently “fortunate” (1.1.176) match. His 
love is emphatically not that pure love which the lead casket was supposed 
to identify.
       If  the  casket test does not work ideally, alternate explanations of how 
it does work are available. Th e test is twice referred to as a “lottery” (1.2.29, 
2.1.15) and Morocco compares the test to the game of dice, where “blind 
fortune” can deprive “the better man” of victory (2.1.32–38). Nor is he alone 
in identifying  the role of fortune (see 3.2.21). One may also notice that the 
winner, aside from whatever hints he may get, is aided by his insider’s knowl-
edge of the culture; whereas Morocco rejects the lead casket, saying that “men 
that hazard all / Do it in hope of fair advantages” (2.7.18–19), Bassanio has a 
better sense of what the occasion calls for.
       Portia’s response to her three suitors can also be discussed outside the 
context of romance. She has no interest in Arragon and Morocco; Bassanio 
is her clear choice. Th ere is good reason for thinking that her feelings are 
in large measure dictated by her class and background. It is noticeable, for 
example, that she never takes any interest in Morocco’s personal qualities; she 
has the same objection to him before she meets him and after he fails the test: 
“Let all of  his complexion choose me so.”8 By way of contrast, Portia shows 
immediate interest upon hearing that  a wealthy Venetian approaches, and 
when 3.2 opens shortly after Bassanio’s arrival, Portia showers him with the 
aﬀ ection she has reserved for the ﬁ rst eminently suitable bachelor to make his 
way to the shores of Belmont.
       Yet it  is necessary to deﬁ ne Portia’s development more precisely. Ear-
lier, encroached upon by two unwelcome suitors, her less attractive features 
predominate. With Bassanio, on the other hand, far more appealing charac-
teristics surface. Only when she again feels threatened does she relentlessly 
pursue her interests.
       To  Portia’s credit it  can be said that she honors her father’s will  and 
allows both Arragon  and Morocco  to make their  choices. Nevertheless, a 
rebellious spirit sometimes threatens to overcome her inhibitions. Without 
breaking the will, she does what she can to discourage Morocco and Arra-
gon. For example, she communicates to the former her dislike of him and 
postpones his choice in the hope he will  be discouraged; more important, 
she seems to invent the stipulation that a failed wooer cannot court again, for 
when Arragon later opens the wrong casket, he discovers a scroll inviting him 
subsequently to “take what wife [he] will to bed” (2.9.70). Lest Bassanio be 
discouraged, he is never confronted with the inhibition, as noted earlier.

47
38                                               Richard A. Levin


        Portia’s rudeness also helps to develop the darker notes in her character. Act 
2, scene 1 opens with Morocco pleading, “Mislike me not  for my complexion.”  In 
view of a knowledge of Portia’s prejudices, one infers that she has communicated 
her feelings to him.  Conﬁ rmation  soon arrives. Portia  observes equivocally that 
she is not  sol[el]y  led /  By nice  direction  of  a maiden’s eyes,” and then says of 
Morocco  that he  is “as fair /  As any comer [she  has] look’d on  yet” (20–21)—a 
dubious compliment,   even if  we overlook  Morocco’s  having  just used “fair”  to 
mean “light-complexioned”   (4).  Morocco, trying   to keep his  chin  up, responds, 
“Even  for  that  I  thank  you,” and  boasts of his  achievements, awkwardly  pro-
claiming  that women  of his own  color have found  him  attractive. He  either is a 
braggart or is trying  to steady himself, meanwhile remaining  studiously  polite to 
his hostess. His manners show to advantage against hers. And even if in a strange 
way her behavior can be extenuated on the grounds that she needs to discourage 
Morocco, the  hint  of  gratuitous  cruelty is  conﬁ rmed when she taunts  her next 
suitor, Arragon, after he has made his wrong choice (2.9.53  and 61–62).
        Just  as Portia’s attitude   towards   Morocco   and Arragon   highlights    her 
intolerance  for  outsiders encroaching   on her  life, so her  very diﬀ erent  recep-
tion  for Bassanio  shows her insularity.  Nevertheless,  Portia  does reveal genu-
inely  attractive  aspects of  her character.  While   Bassanio is  precipitating   the 
moment  of choice, Portia  pours forth   her heart. It  is all the more  important   to 
notice, therefore,  that  even as she rides the high  tide  of romantic   passion, she 
experiences an undertow   that  strengthens  her self-protective   urges. Th at she 
has pleaded unavailingly   for  Bassanio to  postpone  his choice  suggests to her 
that her feelings  are not reciprocated;  she asks him to “confess /  What  treason 
there is mingled   with   [his]  love”  (3.2.26–27).  Portia  shows  that  her infatua-
tion  and caution   exist side-by-side   and that  highly   emotional  circumstances 
are likely  to shift  her  in one  direction  or  the other.
        On   all  sides at this  time   is evidence  of  the  two  Portias.  Th ey are seen 
in  her  apparent  decision  to  adhere  to  her  father’s  will.   She  is, on  the  one 
hand, the  trusting    and dutiful    daughter,  but  she is  also  a sceptical  woman 
who apparently  resolves to let  Bassanio be tested: “If  you  do love me, you will 
ﬁ nd me  out”  (41).9 Similarly,   Portia  describes  Bassanio’s moment  of  choice 
romantically,  but   she adds  sophisticated   touches. From   farfetched   conceits 
one infers  that  she  does not  really  confuse  reality  and  fantasy; for  example, 
before calling  for  music, she describes Bassanio’s possible defeat as follows:


               if he  loses he makes a swan-like  end,
        Fading  in  music. Th at the comparison
        May  stand  more proper,  my eye shall  be the stream
        And   wat’ry  death-bed  for  him.
            (3.2.44–47)

48
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        39


Portia’s description of  Bassanio’s approach to  the  caskets more sharply 
reveals her dual self:


             Now he goes,
       With   no less presence, but with much more love,
       Th an young Alcides [Hercules], when he did redeem
       Th e virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
       To the sea-monster.
           (3.2.53–57)


It is unlikely that Portia actually confuses the heroism of Hercules with Bas-
sanio’s challenge; moreover, by carefully distinguishing Bassanio’s motives 
from Hercules’s pecuniary interest, she reveals that she has considered their 
possible likeness.
       If  Portia, given her limited knowledge of Bassanio’s background, never-
theless hovers between faith and doubt, the viewer who knows so much more, 
must wonder what lies in store for her. Th e song announces how quickly fancy 
dies, echoing as it does so Salerio and Gratiano’s conclusion that romance 
soon gives way to disillusionment (2.6.5–19).
       As Portia watches Bassanio choose the right casket, she expresses relief, 
meanwhile admitting to the doubts she has had:


       How  all the other passions ﬂ eet to air,
       As doubtful  thoughts, and rash-embrac’d despair,
       And  shudd’ring fear, and green-eyed jealousy!
       O  love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
       In  measure rain thy joy, scant this excess!
       I  feel too much thy blessing; make it less,
       For fear I surfeit.
           (3.2.108–14)


The passage not only clarifies what Portia felt earlier; it also ominously sug-
gests the future. Though Portia wishes to take Bassanio’s correct choice as 
magical confirmation of his love, she “fears” that she “surfeits.” In effect, she 
has experienced one swing of the pendulum; the rest of the scene traces the 
return swing. The motion, imperceptible at first, gathers momentum.
       Bassanio, having read the enclosed scroll, approaches Portia and requests 
a kiss. In granting the kiss, Portia generously bestows herself. All she pos-
sesses is Bassanio’s; she only wishes that she were “a thousand times more fair, 
ten thousand times more rich,” so that she might “stand high in [Bassanio’s] 
account” (154–55). Implicit  in  her words is  the knowledge that  Bassanio 

49
40                                          Richard A. Levin


does have an interest in her property and wealth. But this  awareness does 
not fully measure Portia’s sophistication. She calls herself “an unlesson’d girl, 
unschool’d, unpractic’d” (159), and says that she commits herself, her “fair 
mansion,” and all her servants, to Bassanio to be directed, “as from her lord, 
her governor, her king” (164–71). However, is Portia teacher and not pupil, 
and is her gift not intended to be exemplary?10 She slips a ring from her ﬁ nger 
to Bassanio’s, saying that should he lose or relinquish the ring, “let it presage 
the ruin of your love, / And be my vantage to exclaim on you” (173–74). Portia 
hints at the reciprocity that has been lacking, and by asking for a pledge of 
faith, she suggests her uncertainty about the faith she has so far been oﬀ ered. 
Moreover, although Portia surely does not calculatedly deceive Bassanio, the 
totality with  which she gives shows that she oﬀ ers words and not deeds: her 
gift is sealed with a kiss only.
       No  sooner does Bassanio accept Portia’s ring than Nerissa and Gratiano 
disclose that they have been eagerly waiting to see whether Bassanio would 
chose rightly. “My eyes can look as swift as yours,” Gratiano tells Bassanio, 
adding, “Your fortune stood upon the casket there, / And so did mine too” 
(201–2). Gratiano reveals that he wooed Nerissa and obtained her agreement 
to marry him if  Bassanio’s “fortune” (207) was to achieve Portia. It takes no 
great stretch of the imagination to see that regardless of the aﬀ ection Gra-
tiano and Nerissa presumably feel for one another, both want marriage only 
if they can hang onto the coattails of a wealthy couple. Later, Gratiano exults 
to Salerio, “We are the Jasons, we have won the ﬂ eece” (241); even in Portia’s 
presence, he comes very close to saying that both he and Bassanio were “swift” 
to fall in love partly because it was advantageous for them to do so.
       Gratiano and Nerissa’s disclosure should be disturbing to Portia for rea-
sons other than what it implies about Bassanio’s fortune-hunting. Th e pros-
pect of a double wedding must make her wedding seem less precious, the 
ordinary course of the world, and not a unique event. Also, by asking in eﬀ ect 
for a share of Bassanio’s winnings, Gratiano makes Belmont appear as a pie 
to be divided up. We should not be surprised if Portia becomes newly alert to 
the question of how Bassanio’s Venetian attachments will aﬀ ect her marriage 
and her position at Belmont. Th e most serious danger from Venice is yet to 
emerge: Bassanio’s emotional commitment to Antonio.
       Th e key incident begins as simply a  further Venetian encroachment. 
Lorenzo, Jessica, and Salerio arrive, the last bearing Antonio’s letter for Bas-
sanio.11 Bassanio instinctively begins to welcome his friends to the home, 
then (perhaps with a glance from Portia) hesitates, wondering whether his 
“new int’rest” in Belmont permits him this  privilege (221).12 Portia informs 
Bassanio that his guests are “entirely welcome”; though cordial, she never 
greets the friends directly, and her adverb, “entirely,” suggests that there are 

50
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        41


degrees of welcome that have yet to be deﬁ ned. Ralph Berry nicely para-
phrases Portia in order to catch her implication: “You haven’t taken over my 
household yet. Please make your friends welcome; and do not forget that I 
am chatelaine here” (p. 13). When it comes to deeds and not words, Portia 
has not yet transferred title to her property; in  light of  the latest intrusion, 
it seems that she may become less and less inclined to relinquish any of the 
constituents of her power.
       When  Bassanio receives from Salerio Antonio’s letter and upon read-
ing it turns pale, Portia becomes anxious. What can explain such a profound 
change in Bassanio? “I am half yourself ” (248), she says hopefully, and asks 
him to share with her the contents of the letter.
       Th e shamefaced young lord begins by admitting that he lied when he 
said that his only wealth “ran in [his] veins” (255). He is not merely penniless; 
he is in debt to a friend who placed himself in mortal jeopardy to make the 
loan. Now this friend faces imminent death. Portia falls silent upon hearing 
these disclosures. She must realize that Bassanio tells something short of the 
whole truth;  after all, only moments before she had put aside “green-eyed 
jealousy” and her suspicions of “treason.” Perhaps Bassanio, desperately short 
of money, got Antonio to ﬁ nance the lavish expedition to Belmont. Might it 
be that Antonio  did so, secure in the knowledge that Portia was only to be 
a source of income for Bassanio, whose aﬀ ections were otherwise engaged? 
Th is is the worst possibility Portia can ponder; less threatening alternatives 
soon become apparent.
       When  Portia does speak up, she asks Bassanio a curious question: “Is it 
your dear friend that is thus in trouble?” (291). As Antonio has already been 
identiﬁ ed as Bassanio’s “dear friend” (261), Portia apparently probes for more 
information about the relationship. Bassanio answers by describing Antonio 
as “the dearest friend to  me, the kindest man, /  Th e best-condition’d and 
unwearied spirit / In doing courtesies” (292–94). From these words, conﬂ ict-
ing conclusions can be drawn. Antonio may be just as good a person as Bas-
sanio describes, or he may appear better than he is through Bassanio’s guilty 
eyes. Possibly Antonio’s generosity is calculated to have just the eﬀ ect it seems 
to be having on Bassanio. Portia has earlier heard Bassanio say of Antonio’s 
letter that “every word in it  [is] a gaping wound / Issuing life-blood”  (265–
66). Why has Antonio written such a letter, if not to inﬂ uence Bassanio’s feel-
ings? Portia may be beginning to wonder whether her real worry ought not 
to be Bassanio’s present feelings for her, but how these feelings might alter as 
Antonio’s death approaches.
       Portia responds to Bassanio with an oﬀ er that makes her appear a model 
of kindness. She suggests that she and Bassanio should promptly marry and 
that he should then leave for Venice with any sum of money he thinks  he 

51
42                                          Richard A. Levin


needs to rescue Antonio. When Antonio is freed, she will welcome the two of 
them to her house. Portia is altogether too obliging to be sincere. How many 
wives, for example, would assure their husbands, without a trace of irony, 
that they should “hence upon [their] wedding-day”? (311). How many wives 
would cheerfully make Portia’s oﬀ er: “My maid  Nerissa and myself mean 
time / Will  live as maids and widows” (309–10)? And how can Portia believe 
that her money will  save Antonio, when she oﬀ ers the precise sum Jessica 
has said Shylock would refuse—“twenty times” the principal? (307; cf. 287). 
I suggest that Portia’s speech should arouse curiosity about her real attitude 
and her real intentions.
       Portia seems conscious of the danger that Antonio may overwhelm Bas-
sanio with feelings of guilt. She says, for example, that she will not let a friend 
like the one Bassanio describes “lose a hair through Bassanio’s fault” (302). 
She adds that she sends Bassanio to Venice because she does not want him 
to lie by her side “with an unquiet soul” (306). Hence Portia’s generosity may 
include a selﬁ sh motive; having seen how Antonio’s generosity manipulates 
Bassanio, she resolves to outdo Antonio.
       Portia’s real feelings and underlying strategy are perhaps most strongly 
hinted at in  three lines, the ﬁ rst two of which form  a couplet that initially 
seems to close the scene:


       Bid  your friends welcome, show a merry cheer—
       Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
       But  let me hear the letter of your friend.
           (3.2.312–14)


The couplet,  as John Russell Brown notes, was relegated to  the bottom 
of the  page by Alexander  Pope, who considered its commercial  attitude 
unworthy  of Shakespeare.13 Brown answers that Portia makes “a  joyful 
acknowledgement of the pleasures of giving for love.” Yet it is not so easy to 
dismiss the couplet’s discordant note. Traditionally, men court women with 
gifts, as Bassanio well knows—he came with gifts. Now  Portia has heard 
evidence strongly suggesting that her wealth drew Bassanio hither; and her 
wealth is soon to be used in an  attempt to rescue his friend. The  couplet 
surely reveals a wry Portia, not unwilling  to  give, but not  unaware of the 
imposition, either. Furthermore, her sudden request to hear Antonio’s letter 
belies the “all’s well” attitude conveyed by the couplet. Questions about the 
relationship of Bassanio and Antonio have caught her attention, and she is 
determined to learn more.
       If  Portia has feared that Antonio wishes to impose on both herself and 
Bassanio, the letter conﬁ rms her suspicions. Antonio, after describing his 

52
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        43


wretched plight to “sweet Bassanio” (315), asks that he return to be with him 
at his death, while implying that  Bassanio may wish instead to indulge his 
“pleasure.” “If your love do not persuade you to come,” Antonio concludes, 
“let not my letter” (321–22). Antonio  is of course disingenuous; his letter is 
calculated to bring Bassanio scurrying home. Portia would have every reason 
to wonder why Antonio attaches such signiﬁ cance to Bassanio’s return. Could 
it be that Antonio wishes to impress his sacriﬁ ce on Bassanio?
       Having  heard the letter, Portia immediately instructs Bassanio: “O love! 
dispatch all business and be gone” (323). Th e “business” she refers to is their 
nuptials! A rebuke is implicit in her oﬀ er, and Bassanio, as if already respond-
ing to Portia’s moral pressure, agrees to leave with the promise that until he 
returns “no bed shall e’er be guilty of [his] stay” (326). Bassanio promises a 
ﬁ delity Portia will later enforce.
       Portia’s intentions  begin to  come clear a  short while  after Bassanio 
departs. Scene 4 opens with Lorenzo praising her patience. He compliments 
Portia’s appreciation of “godlike amity”—the friendship that exists between 
her husband and Antonio—adding that if Portia “knew how dear a lover of ” 
Bassanio was Antonio, she would be even prouder than she is of her good 
deed (1–9). Th is passage is commonly read as deserved praise. Yet the viewer 
may wonder whether any wife is as patient and selﬂ ess as the one Lorenzo 
thinks he sees in Portia. Is it not more likely that Lorenzo, perhaps to help 
make himself comfortable in Belmont, has taken to reading courtesy books? 
Having opened to a page praising the resolution of the conﬂ ict between Love 
and Friendship, he sincerely or ﬂ atteringly compliments Portia for her con-
formity to a Renaissance ideal of conduct.
       Portia covertly mocks Lorenzo, I think. She is making no sacriﬁ ce at all, 
she says. Antonio, “being the bosom lover of [her] lord, / Must needs be like 
[her] lord” (17–18). And  just as Antonio and Bassanio are alike, so she and 
her husband are alike. Th us, in sending her husband with money to rescue 
Antonio, she is merely “purchasing the semblance of [her own] soul, / From 
out the state of hellish cruelty” (20–21). As a proposition in geometry, it may 
be true that things equal to the same thing are equal to each other; but the 
logic of  the human heart is  diﬀ erent, as Shakespeare knew in Sonnet 42, 
where the speaker describes as “sweet ﬂ attery” the thought that because his 
friend and he are “one,” his mistress, in loving his friend, loves him.
       Lorenzo  is  certainly proven wrong;  Portia, no  patient  Griselda, has 
already instructed her servants that Lorenzo and  Jessica are to be put in 
charge of the household in her absence. Portia so informs her guests and after 
they exit, she sends a servant to Padua to her “cousin,” Lord Bellario, from 
whom the servant is to  get “garments” and “notes” (legal notes or memo-
randa), which he is then to deliver to Portia at the ferry to Venice. Although 

53
44                                          Richard A. Levin


we do not yet know the details of her plan, we now anticipate her intervention 
in the courtroom.
       Alone with  Nerissa, Portia reveals something of her state of mind. Here-
tofore, she had been an unmarried woman, conﬁ ned to Belmont while the 
men cavorted in Venice. Much as Bassanio did earlier, she plans to mix plea-
sure with business. She anticipates with glee the disguise she and Nerissa will 
don. With  a new risqué touch, she remarks that the men will think the two 
of them “accomplished / With what [they] lack” (61–62). And when Nerissa 
asks, regarding their disguise, “Why, shall we turn to men?” (78)—meaning, 
“turn into men”—Portia remarks that a “lewd” interpreter might understand 
Nerissa very diﬀ erently. Th ese intimations of sexual liberation are slightly 
menacing because Portia also hints that she has a score to settle with the 
men. In her disguise, Portia will act “like a ﬁ ne bragging youth” and tell of 
“honorable ladies [who] sought [his]  love” and whom he betrayed. (Recall 
that earlier Bassanio had confessed to Portia that he had been a “braggart” on 
his arrival in Belmont [3.2.258].)
       Th e new Portia is unfamiliar, of course; her transformation has been too 
sudden and she has yet to ﬁ nd a stage on which to display herself. Neverthe-
less, one can draw certain inferences about the change she has undergone and 
its likely inﬂ uence on her subsequent actions. Th e last chapter showed that 
from the  play’s outset the Venetians give “business” priority. Portia, on the 
other hand, does not do so, even though she ﬁ nds herself in newly exposed 
circumstances. Now, however, the veil of sentiment seems to have slipped from 
her eyes. Portia must realize that Bassanio, in coming to Belmont, betrayed 
a “twofold truth” (Sonnet 41), to Antonio  and to  herself. Bassanio betrayed 
Antonio by revealing a willingness to put marriage before friendship, as well 
as by allowing Antonio to place himself in danger. Bassanio betrayed Portia 
by seeming to be what he was not, an unencumbered lover. Portia might plau-
sibly conclude that marriage, rather than being the journey’s end where love 
conquers all, instead only involves her in a continuing struggle in which one 
person will betray another for advantage.
       Although  “fancy” may lie  dying in  Portia, she still wants marriage to 
Bassanio, presumably for reasons of the heart as well as for more pragmatic 
ones. Nevertheless, this marriage hurtles her into particularly vulnerable cir-
cumstances both within the marriage and within society. She cannot be sure 
either that she has secured Bassanio’s aﬀ ection or loyalty or that the distribu-
tion of  power between herself and Bassanio will leave her any meaningful 
freedom or inﬂ uence in society at large.
       Indeed,  considering for  a moment  matters from   her point  of  view 
only—ignoring, that is, a sense of her still-overwhelming privileges—one can 
see that she feels herself as much an “odd one out” as Antonio and Shylock 

54
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        45


consider themselves. Between the time of her father’s death and her own 
marriage, Belmont was Portia’s. And far from struggling for  the respectful 
attention of men, she was the cynosure of their eyes. Her marriage now risks 
making her a stranger in her own home, while Bassanio and perhaps a host 
of his friends and hangers-on ﬂ ood her shores. Moreover, she cannot even be 
certain that her claim to Bassanio will prevail over Antonio’s older and prior 
one. Th us, it would be logical for Portia to move vigorously to protect her 
interests, and, in light of the treatment she has received, to feel thoroughly 
justiﬁ ed in doing so.
       However, many in the audience will be unwilling to share Portia’s sense 
of injured merit, and Th e Merchant does, I think, portray her as overwhelm-
ingly privileged. To the tasks that lie ahead, Portia brings advantages asso-
ciated with her upbringing.  She has an impeccably gracious and charming 
surface. Her poise allows her to convert to an asset what might elsewise be 
a liability: she is a woman in a world where men generally have the power. 
Portia can deceptively maneuver behind a mask of conformity. And, as one 
further advantage associated with her class, Portia has long been inclined to 
embrace the “way of the world.” When to these assets bestowed by nurture 
are added others acquired by nature—Portia possesses high intelligence and 
attractive, not to say beguiling, looks—it appears that she may be ready to 
dominate others and to adjudicate the pending claims, legal and emotional, 
respectively, of Shylock and Antonio.


                                                      *  *  *


The courtroom scene, 4.1, constitutes the most decisive test of any society 
in all the  comedies. Shylock justifies his demand for a pound of Antonio’s 
flesh by likening the proposed forfeiture to other brutal actions carried out 
by society. For the audience, Shylock’s accusation has a very direct meaning. 
He had promised, “the  villainy  you teach me, I  will  execute” (3.1.71–72); 
the course he now takes is shaped by the treatment he has received, or so 
he alleges. Some have argued that Shylock is proven wrong and that during 
the scene Venice ultimately extends to him the very mercy he has failed to 
grant Antonio.  Other critics find  that  Venice acts reprehensibly—just how 
reprehensibly we have now to consider.
       To think  of Shylock as a monster is to misread fatally the scene. True, he 
contemplates a horrible crime with disconcerting eagerness—in all likelihood, 
for example, he sharpens a knife on the sole of his shoe (see 123–24). Yet Gra-
tiano is signiﬁ cantly wrong when he describes Shylock as “wolvish, bloody, 
starv’d, and ravenous” (138); Shylock’s humanity has diminished, not vanished. 
A comparison of Shylock in 1.3 and in the courtroom scene indicates at once 

55
46                                          Richard A. Levin


that though he felt before the desire to “feed fat” the hatred he bore Antonio, 
he is now far closer to taking  Antonio’s life—without  being fully  resolved. 
He is still inﬂ uenced by the action of others. One illustration will serve here. 
When Bassanio pleads for Antonio’s life, Shylock, though he has been reluc-
tant to admit his motives, remarks: “What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting 
thee twice?” (69). Shylock seems to be giving Antonio another opportunity to 
oﬀ er a reconciliation. Instead, Antonio responds, much as he did in the earlier 
scene, by antagonizing Shylock further. Antonio asks the court to proceed 
with judgment, explaining that it is useless to attempt “to soften that—than 
which what’s harder?—/ His Jewish heart!” (79–80). Antonio’s motive remains 
the same—to be seen making a sacriﬁ ce for Bassanio—and Shylock must not 
be allowed to stand in the way of Antonio’s death.
       Th is incident illustrates another  important  fact about the  courtroom 
scene: the personal drama continues, although it is not always obvious. Th ree 
characters, all responding to the betrayals they have endured and their fears of 
isolation, maneuver for advantage. How does this personal conﬂ ict shed light 
on a situation in which, it is sometimes thought, the essential clash is between 
principles and not individuals?
       If  Shylock remains human for the viewer, then his charge against Venice 
is a serious matter. Shylock comes into the courtroom wishing to show soci-
ety that its image of him is a mirror image of itself. Th is strategy also serves 
another purpose; it allows Shylock to avoid admitting the  humiliation  and 
suﬀ ering that has actually brought him to press his claim. Shylock therefore 
pretends he is not an abused Jew but a Venetian aristocrat whose “humor” 
(43) it is to claim Antonio’s ﬂ esh. Just as a wealthy Venetian is free to spend 
“ten thousand ducats” to exterminate a rat (44–46), so Shylock will sacriﬁ ce 
three thousand ducats—or any sum he is oﬀ ered, no matter how great—to 
have Antonio’s life.
       Bassanio ﬁ nds outrageous Shylock’s comparing the taking of a man’s life 
with a rat’s (63–64). Yet Shylock’s example is intended to parody the abuses 
of human life tolerated in  Venice. Shylock may well have in mind his own 
treatment as a “dog,” but he will not say so now. Instead, he waits for a chance 
to illustrate how others besides himself have been abused. When the duke 
asks how he can “hope for mercy, rend’ring none” (88), Shylock replies that he 
fears no judgment because he acts no diﬀ erently from privileged Venetians:


       You have among you many a purchas’d slave,
       Which  like your asses, and your dogs and mules,
       You use in abject and in slavish parts,
       Because you bought them.
           (4.1.90–93)

56
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        47


Dr. Johnson found Shylock’s argument “conclusive”: “I see not how Vene-
tians or Englishmen, while they practice the purchase and sale of slaves, can 
much enforce or demand the law of ‘doing to others as we would that they 
should do to us.’ ”14 Johnson rightly draws out the implications of Shylock’s 
analogy: there is a contradiction between Venetian ideals and Venetian prac-
tice. Yet inasmuch as the audience has heard nothing so far about Venetian 
slavery, it might  be better to  say that the  audience, rather than granting 
assent immediately, instead resolves to scrutinize the society more closely. In 
fact, at this very moment new doubts arise about the fairness of the court.
       From  the opening of the scene, questions have occurred. Th e presiding 
judicial oﬃ  cer is the duke—it is possible, then, that Venice does not always 
maintain a ﬁ rm line of demarcation between judicial and political consider-
ations. Of interest is the fact that the scene begins not with Shylock and Anto-
nio—plaintiﬀ  and defendant—facing the duke in open court; instead, before 
Shylock is invited to enter, the duke oﬀ ers Antonio sympathy, while describing 
Shylock in stereotypical terms as “a stony adversary, an inhuman wretch, / 
Uncapable of pity, void and empty / From any dram of mercy” (4–6).
       When  Shylock is called in, the duke arrogantly appoints him his role. 
Shylock should not merely let Antonio live; he should also “forgive a moi’ty 
of the principal” owed him, in  consideration of the losses “that have of late 
so huddled on [Antonio’s] back” (28). Th ough the duke knows of Shylock’s 
own recent aﬄ  ictions (having been called to investigate on the night Jessica 
ﬂ ed), they have made no impression on him. Th e explanation is that the duke 
groups together Jews, Tartars, and Turks, all of whom must learn to imitate 
the “gentile” virtue of mercy: “We all expect a gentle answer, Jew!” A ruler so 
sure of the superiority of his own people is a danger, for he may feel justiﬁ ed 
abusing outsiders. Th e duke therefore warrants close attention.
       When  Shylock confronts the court  with the  issue of Venetian slavery, 
the duke attempts no rebuttal. Instead, he makes a startling announcement:


       Upon  my power I may dismiss this court,
       Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,
       Whom  I  have sent for to determine this,
       Come here to-day.
           (4.1.104–7)


The court had seemed about to render a verdict supporting Shylock’s posi-
tion. Now the duke retains residual “power” and will use it rather than grant 
Shylock’s plea or answer his challenge to the society. Whether “dismiss” has 
its usual meaning and the  duke proposes to reject Shylock’s plea entirely 
or whether the duke only proposes to “adjourn” the hearing, it is clear that 

57
48                                          Richard A. Levin


he has every hope of circumventing what he takes to be the law.15 Bellario 
is being called in not because the duke is in doubt about the law, but only 
because the law does not support the verdict the duke desires.
       Yet this  passage raises even more serious questions. Th e duke must be 
lying—unless an extraordinary coincidence has occurred or the dramatist is 
fumbling as he tries  to synchronize details of  his plot—because Bellario’s 
interest in the case must derive not from the duke’s inquiry but from Portia’s. 
On the basis of what is known about the duke’s predisposition, it seems pos-
sible that he may be scheming.
       A  few details help to strengthen the impression of a secret plot. Th e duke, 
told that  Bellario’s messenger has arrived with “letters,” asks for him to be 
admitted. Nerissa, disguised as a lawyer’s clerk, enters and delivers correspon-
dence, which the duke reads silently while Gratiano and Shylock exchange 
insults. Th e duke then interrupts to say that Bellario  has recommended a 
lawyer; upon learning that this lawyer waits outside, the duke agrees “with all 
[his] heart” to admit him, and asks that he be given “courteous conduct” into 
the courtroom.
       Meanwhile, at the duke’s request, a clerk reads Bellario’s letter. Bellario 
writes that the duke’s request for help found him ill. However, he had with 
him “a young doctor of Rome,” Balthazar, with whom he consulted on the 
“cause in controversy between the Jew and Antonio the merchant.” Bellario 
strongly recommends Balthazar to the court and asks for his “gracious accep-
tance,” while testifying that Balthazar is wise in spite of his youth. Th e viewer 
of course knows that this “young doctor” is Portia, that she has not been to 
Padua, and that she lacks all legal training—but that she does have a personal 
interest in the case before the court.
       When  Portia enters, the duke warmly takes her hand (169) and at once 
puts her in full  control of the hearing. It seems as if members of the ruling 
class are doing favors for one another. For his cousin, Bellario intervenes with 
the duke, while the duke helps a famous jurist from a neighboring city.
       Consider  for a  moment the Venetian attitude  towards justice, which 
Shakespeare began to establish prior to the court scene. In 3.2, one hears that 
rejection of Shylock’s claim would “impeach the freedom of the state” (278). 
A few lines later, in the next scene, the phrase is virtually repeated (3.3.29), 
with a fuller  explanation of the situation. “Th e trade and proﬁ t of the city” 
(30) depends on foreign commerce, and this commerce in turn depends on 
the conﬁ dence foreigners have in Venetian law. Th us it is not love of justice 
for her own sake, but mere self-interest, that keeps Venice within the law. By 
the beginning of act 4, Antonio testiﬁ es that the duke has exhausted all “law-
ful means” for trying to free him (9). Yet one possibility remains: that Venice, 
while seeming to adhere to law, will work stealthily.

58
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        49


       Because of the circumstances under which Portia  is admitted to  the 
courtroom; she is considered as an Establishment ﬁ gure who knows “the rules 
of the game” and will play by them. In due course, she proves her commit-
ment. When Bassanio beseeches her to show compassion and save Antonio’s 
life by “wrest[ing] once the law to [her] authority,” Portia adamantly refuses:


       It  must not be, there is no power in Venice
       Can alter a decree established.
       ’Twill  be recorded for a precedent,
       And  many an error by the same example
       Will   rush into the state. It cannot be.
           (4.1.218–22)


Portia knows  that her  own privileges  depend on the preservation of  the 
status quo; she will protect the reputation of the court.
       Portia’s initial eﬀ ort is directed at persuading Shylock to show mercy—
or so it seems. A question arises because in the ﬁ rst words she speaks to him 
she guarantees that “the Venetian law / Cannot impugn you as you do pro-
ceed” (178–79). Th is assurance becomes almost a refrain, repeated at the same 
time she is asking him to be merciful. It is possible, therefore, that she tempts 
him to expose his cruelty.
       Th e most important evidence that Portia is devious involves her speech 
beginning “Th e quality of mercy is not strain’d” (184). As all readers of Th e 
Merchant know, these lines are as moving a paean to mercy as can be imag-
ined. And the speech is never more forceful than when Portia describes mercy 
as the virtue best becoming the “throned monarch” (189); mercy, she says, 
“is an attribute to God  himself; / And  earthly power doth then show likest 
God’s / When mercy seasons justice” (195–97). It would be very interesting 
to know whether Shakespeare intended any response from Shylock at this 
point; Portia’s words might be expected to have an especially powerful eﬀ ect 
on him, for he has come into court arguing that it  is for those in  authority 
to establish standards of conduct. Now Portia points out that in the present 
situation, “earthly power” is Shylock’s—it is for him to establish a precedent, 
if he wishes.
       Th ough we do not know Shylock’s response, it is clear that Portia veers 
at midline  and with an  illogical “therefore” (she does not go on to draw  a 
conclusion), suddenly introduces a far less compelling argument: because our 
salvation depends on divine mercy, in the hope of that mercy we ourselves 
should be merciful. Th is is an appeal that would make its greatest impact on 
one who believes in Christian doctrine, as Shakespeare’s audience perhaps 
realized; in any event, the argument is less attractive than the ﬁ rst one because 

59
50                                          Richard A. Levin


it asks Shylock to admit wrongdoing of his own. Yet even at this point, Portia 
does not pause for Shylock’s response, but instead ﬁ nishes her speech by once 
again assuring him that if he insists, “this strict court of Venice” remains pre-
pared to render a verdict in his favor. As if seizing bait, Shylock does demand 
a verdict.
       Whether  or not Portia plots against Shylock from the outset, she does 
so eventually. She contrives to introduce a distinction between extracting a 
pound of ﬂ esh and taking Antonio’s life in a way that does not allow Shy-
lock to catch the potential legal signiﬁ cance of her point. Portia asks whether 
Shylock has provided a surgeon to staunch the ﬂ ow of blood and prevent 
Antonio’s bleeding to death. “It is predictable,” A. D. Moody remarks, “that 
[Shylock] should declare himself under no  obligation to  spend money on 
his enemy—why should not his friends provide the surgeon?” (p. 43). Portia 
again distracts Shylock from the possible legal implications of his decision 
when she suggests “charity” as a motive for saving Antonio (261). Portia’s 
trap is now set.
       Before this moment arrives, another, more remote, possibility has devel-
oped: Portia might actually allow Antonio to die. When Antonio asks Portia 
(as he earlier asked the duke) not to plead further with Shylock and instead to 
render a verdict, Portia replies: “Why then thus it is: / You must prepare your 
bosom for his knife” (244–45). It is not diﬃ  cult to imagine these lines spoken 
with irritation.  Yet Portia proceeds cautiously. After setting the trap against 
Shylock, she draws Antonio out: “You, merchant, have you any thing to say?” 
(263). Antonio’s life may depend on his answer.
       He  takes the opportunity to try  to ensure that his death will have the 
desired eﬀ ect:


       Commend me to your honorable wife,
       Tell  her the process of Antonio’s end,
       Say how I lov’d you, speak me fair in death;
       And  when the tale is told, bid her be judge
       Whether  Bassanio had not once a love.
       Repent but you that you shall lose your friend,
       And  he repents not that he pays your debt.
           (4.1.273–79)


Antonio  puts himself forward  as Portia’s competitor: his death will  prove 
that  Bassanio “had   once a  love”—that   is,  Antonio’s  “love”   surpasses 
Portia’s, which has not  proven itself  with  a comparable sacrifice. In  the 
last two lines  quoted, Antonio  tries to  make Bassanio feel guilt.  By ask-
ing Bassanio to “repent,” Antonio implies  that Bassanio, if left to himself, 

60
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        51


might not  lament the loss of his friend. The word  “repent” of course rein-
forces Antonio’s message, for while it ostensibly means only “regret,” it also 
hints at the need for contrition.
       Bassanio promptly gives the desired response; he would willingly sacri-
ﬁ ce “life itself, [his] wife, and all the world” to save Antonio (284). Of course, 
Bassanio oﬀ ers mere words—he does not contemplate being asked to prove 
his love. Yet Portia has every reason to think that the memory of Antonio’s 
death may in time work its eﬀ ect on Bassanio; she cannot aﬀ ord to let Anto-
nio die. She must deal with his threat to her marriage diﬀ erently.
       She prepares to close in on Shylock. Twice she declares the bond forfeit; 
then, halting Shylock, she declares: “Th e words [of the bond] expressly are a 
‘pound of ﬂ esh’ ” (307). If Shylock sheds “one drop of Christian blood,” Vene-
tian law provides that the state is to conﬁ scate all his wealth and property.
       Th e scene has reached a turning point. So far, Shylock has held the 
power and the viewer feared the use he would make of it. Portia’s stealthy 
entrance and the duke’s complicity have only created the potential for a rever-
sal. But Portia is now about to gain the upper hand. Her own use of “earthly 
power” will be tested.
       As if wary from long experience, the moment Portia reveals the law, Shy-
lock senses danger and becomes cautious. First he tries to leave with “thrice” 
the value of the bond, the latest oﬀ er Bassanio has made him (318). Bassanio 
is willing, but Portia will not let him; she leaves Shylock free only to exact the 
forfeiture, at his peril. Shylock quickly asks for only the principal. Bassanio 
is again willing; Portia is not. Finally, Shylock makes to leave with nothing. 
“Tarry, Jew,” Portia commands, and informs him of another law. If any alien is 
discovered plotting against the life of a Venetian citizen, the intended victim 
is to seize half the alien’s wealth, and the state the other half, while the alien’s 
life lies at the mercy of the duke. Th us Shylock, without so much as touching 
Antonio, stands in mortal  danger, as Portia triumphantly declares: “Down 
therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.”
       How  is Portia’s rigorous pursuit of Shylock to be understood? Apolo-
gists for the Venetians generally oﬀ er an explanation along the lines suggested 
by Nevill Coghill:  behind the human drama lies an allegorical one; Shylock 
stands for Justice, Portia for Mercy.16 Before extending mercy, Portia must 
demonstrate the exhaustion of the law: everyone—Shylock included—stands 
guilty before it.
       One  would expect, however, that to demonstrate universal human fal-
libility, Portia would condemn Shylock under a law applicable to all people; 
instead she invokes a law prejudicial to foreigners. She is therefore a person 
with Venetian prejudices and an interest in protecting the city. A foreigner 
has stepped out of line and she pushes him back, as a warning to him and to 

61
52                                          Richard A. Levin


others. Her ingenious manipulation of the law perhaps serves as a reminder 
of her privileged place in society, for she acts like a high-powered lawyer, such 
as the rich are able to hire. Until Portia’s appearance, everyone had assumed 
that the extraction of a pound of ﬂ esh “nearest the heart” meant certain death 
for Antonio.  Only  Portia thinks to  interpret the bond  literally (“the  words 
expressly are ‘a pound of ﬂ esh’ ” [307]), so that it no longer permits the taking 
of Antonio’s life. At one point, Portia even conforms to a proverb and “splits 
hairs”; she says that if Shylock takes even so small an amount above a pound 
that “the scale do turn /  But  in the  estimation of a hair,” his  life is forfeit 
(330–31). Th e poor and the disadvantaged do not get such clever lawyers.
       Portia’s performance appeals to Gratiano, who cheers her on and taunts 
Shylock. One wonders whether Portia is able to please Gratiano because her 
emotions and his have more than a little in common. She observes correct 
courtroom decorum and her surface is far more polished than Gratiano’s. Yet 
Portia, and perhaps the other reﬁ ned members of society, share Gratiano’s 
intolerance for the Jew.
       As disturbing as Portia’s “justice” may be, once she mentions “mercy” one 
waits to see whether Venice will ﬁ nally prove itself superior to Shylock. Th e 
duke promptly says to Shylock: “Th at thou shalt see the diﬀ erence of our spirit, 
/ I  pardon thee thy life  before thou ask it” (368–69). Th e wording suggests 
that the duke’s underlying motive is to exhibit the superiority of the Venetians. 
Similarly, though the duke oﬀ ers to reduce the ﬁ ne Shylock owes the state, 
he sets a telling condition—Shylock must show his “humbleness” (372). Th e 
duke’s underlying hostility towards the Jew is conﬁ rmed after Antonio speaks.
       Antonio,  having been awarded half Shylock’s estate, must take his turn 
oﬀ ering mercy. His speech contains so many ambiguities that his precise 
motives remain obscure, as Shakespeare perhaps intended they should. Anto-
nio is apparently willing to let the state reduce its share to a ﬁ ne, and even to 
relinquish the half due him, so long as Shylock agrees to certain conditions. 
First, Antonio must be permitted to have “in use” the share that he could seize 
outright (383). Antonio’s phrase “in use” is most curious, because it may refer 
to the interest on a loan.17 Possibly, then, Antonio, for his own advantage, 
is again willing to  violate what he earlier described as his practice, “neither 
[to]  lend nor borrow” upon interest (1.3.61). Some editors, wishing to save 
Antonio from thus incriminating himself, have glossed the phrase diﬀ erently; 
perhaps Antonio demands to hold the estate “in trust,” either  for Shylock, 
who would receive income on it, or for Jessica and Lorenzo. Yet however the 
phrase is glossed, it seems as if Antonio subtly combines self-interest—the 
provision of seed money for himself—with the appearance of generosity in 
the form of an inheritance for Jessica and Lorenzo. Th e one person towards 
whom Antonio shows no charitable feeling is Shylock.

62
                                                    Portia’s Belmont                                               53


        As  if to  conﬁ rm his lack of  charity, Antonio   adds two further  stipulations: 
Shylock must agree that at his death all  his wealth will  pass to Lorenzo and  Jes-
sica; and Shylock must  now convert  to Christianity.  Th is last demand has been 
debated by the critics. Some  have held that  Shakespeare’s audience would have 
felt that  Antonio   was doing Shylock  a favor since his only  chance for  salvation 
would be thought to come through  conversion. Yet nothing in Antonio’s language 
suggests he has in mind a kindness for Shylock; the  contrary is the  case. And in 
the present scene, which tests whether Christians  are in actual practice superior 
to Jews or to any other group, Antonio   is doing  little  more than  assuming what 
remains to be proven. Antonio’s own  behavior falls short of  Christian  ideals.
        Perhaps  the  nature  of the  court’s  “mercy”  is  best revealed  by Shylock’s 
reaction. When  Portia  demands  that Shylock  “beg mercy,”  he apparently does 
not do  so (369);  he may well  be stunned,  for  when  the duke  goes on to  oﬀ er 
ameliorating  conditions,   Shylock  seems not to notice  that  some of  his wealth 
may be returned   to him:   “Nay, take  my  life  and all,  pardon  not  that  . . . You 
take my  life  /  When   you  do take  the  means whereby  I  live”  (374,  376–77). 
Shakespeare has been  careful  to  suggest  that  Shylock’s  dependence  on  his 
wealth is not  mercenary. Just a few lines above (267–72), Antonio   had painted 
a bleak picture   of  a penurious  old  age, from   which,  he  said, he was  glad to 
escape through  death. Furthermore,   Shylock’s  lament  echoes the  Bible:  “He 
that taketh   away his neighbor’s  living,  slayeth  him”  (Eccles. 34:12).  Th e seiz-
ing of  Shylock’s property   is certainly  a grievous oﬀ ense.
        After   Antonio’s  carefully  qualiﬁ ed oﬀ er, Shylock is again silent,  and only 
when the duke suddenly threatens  to “recant [his]  pardon,” does Shylock acqui-
esce: “I am content”  (394). Th en he adds, “I am not  well,” and  begs permission 
to leave the courtroom,  a request granted  with  the words “Get   thee gone,” and 
a demand  that  he agree to  sign a  deed of  gift.  Th ere is every indication   that 
Shylock is in  anguish, broken, or  very nearly so, by the court’s “mercy.”
        Once  Shylock  is gone, the  Venetians are “smugly  amiable  among them-
selves, assuring themselves of  their   gentle  community   with   mutual  compli-
ments and  courtesies.”18 Every   detail  is telling.   Th e duke asks Portia  home 
for dinner   (she declines);  then  he suggests that  Antonio   “gratify”   her  with  a 
gift  (406)—as  if  Portia  had  been a lawyer  donating   her services  to Antonio 
and not a judge charged with   impartial  determination    of the law. For Shylock, 
they have not  a word;  their   mercy  was for  display, his anguish  has left  them 
untouched.
        One  might   argue that   the outcome   of the  courtroom   scene is satisfac-
tory;  Antonio   is saved, while  Shylock  is called  to  account and  treated with   a 
minimum   of  kindness—all   he deserves. Yet right   things   sometimes  happen 
for the  wrong  reasons. Th e real drama in  the  courtroom   scene takes place in 
the hearts of  the three  principal   protagonists,  Shylock, Antonio,   and  Portia.

63
54                                          Richard A. Levin


       Even  while  Shylock is pretending  to be  a “humorous” aristocrat, he 
introduces one image that tells another story. He compares himself to men 
who at the sound of a bagpipe “cannot contain their urine” (50). He must, he 
says, “yield to such inevitable shame, / As to oﬀ end himself being oﬀ ended” 
(57–58).19 He realizes that the action he feels compelled to take will shame 
him. A few lines later, he refers to his as a “losing suit.” Th ough the phrase has 
sometimes been glossed as a reference to the three thousand ducats he is pre-
pared to forego, Shylock surely expresses a profounder sense of loss. He had 
once hoped to show Antonio the path to human compassion and had hoped 
to gain social acceptance in the process. Now he is forfeiting both esteem and 
any hope of belonging. Shylock’s reference to a “losing suit” suggests that he 
might wish to be saved from himself. Instead, Portia and Antonio, for their 
own reasons, let him demand more adamantly the pound of ﬂ esh due him.
       Antonio,  like Shylock, is a pitiable ﬁ gure. Th ough he attempts to use his 
death strategically, his desire for death is an expression of both melancholy 
and desperation. Like Shylock he chances to use images that reveal his under-
lying condition: “I  am a tainted wether of the ﬂ ock, / Meetest for death; the 
weakest kind of fruit / Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me” (114–16). 
Antonio  reveals his innermost feeling and does not present his death as a 
noble sacriﬁ ce for a friend.
       Like  Antonio and Shylock, Portia feels that she has been betrayed and is 
in danger. Yet in actual fact she is greatly privileged. Her advantages are much 
in evidence. Th e duke lets her sneak into the courtroom. Th e conﬁ dence her 
status gives her allows her to remain in control of herself as Shylock cannot. 
In her hands Shylock becomes a maddened bull, dangerous only if met head-
on. She builds his trust and he comes to think of her as “a well-deserving pil-
lar” of the law (239). She prevails with ease.
       If  my interpretation of the courtroom scene is correct, then several years 
before King Lear Shakespeare illustrated some of that play’s most important 
lessons. Lear knows how easily the privileged can conceal their guilt: “Th or-
ough tatter’d clothes small vices do appear; / Robes and furr’d gowns hide all.” 
And he knows that if appearances could be penetrated, the moral position of 
social insider and outsider would be found equivalent. In adversity, Lear and 
Gloucester learn “to feel what wretches feel.” Th e “superﬂ uity” of the Vene-
tians closes their hearts to the most important event in the entire scene, the 
crushing of Shylock’s spirit.


                                                      *  *  *


After the tense confrontations and the near-violence of act 4, The Merchant’s 
final act effects a remarkable change in tone: the single scene of the act begins 

64
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        55


with one of the  newlywed couples on a tranquil moonlit evening and ends 
with the reuniting of the two other newlywed couples. And while act 4 con-
firms Shylock as an outsider, act 5 safely ensconces in Belmont two potential 
outsiders: the Jewess Jessica and Antonio, the man who, along with Shylock, 
placed an impediment in the path of Portia and Bassanio’s marriage. What 
has happened, then, to the desire for inclusion and the fear of betrayal and 
exclusion? I believe that the past subtly impinges on the present.
       Th e journey that Th e Merchant has been tracing from single to mar-
ried life and social position  is still  incomplete. Two of the marriages were 
actually left unconsummated when the husbands left for Venice. From the 
hurried arrival and departure of the men, the women infer that they need to 
ensure their husband’s future loyalty. And so, as soon as Portia can, she turns 
all her attention  back to  her marriage: after defeating Shylock and  while 
still  disguised as Balthazar, she begs as a reward the ring she once gave 
Bassanio to wear as a pledge of faith. Th en in a short second scene closing 
the act, Portia explains to Nerissa that the two  women must leave Venice 
hastily in order to arrive home before their husbands. Portia clearly plans a 
reckoning with Bassanio.
       Th e alacrity with which Nerissa falls in line behind Portia and maneu-
vers for Gratiano’s ring suggests that her husband will also be taught a les-
son in ﬁ delity. How a question about ﬁ delity also aﬀ ects the third marriage, 
between Lorenzo and Jessica, can best be discussed after considering the 
broader dimensions of the journey undertaken in Th e Merchant, the journey 
to social position. By the time the last act begins, it is clear that acceptance at 
Belmont will  symbolize social inclusion; moreover, although the three cou-
ples and Antonio are likely to be admitted, the terms by which admission will 
be granted are unknown.
       Th at the gates of Belmont  will  not  simply open wide  to  receive the 
guests and that, instead, terms of some kind will be imposed is quite evident. 
For one thing, Belmont is sure to express a variety of Venice’s preferences and 
prejudices. More important, perhaps, Belmont cannot aﬀ ord to ignore the 
deity of Venice, fortune. To welcome Venetians unqualiﬁ edly is to invite dan-
gerous illusions about how the pie might be further divided. Already some 
Venetians have tentatively encroached on Belmont: Gratiano and Nerissa 
bid to share the spotlight with  Bassanio and Portia, Lorenzo happened by 
Belmont and remained, Bassanio unexpectedly disclosed a prior obligation 
to Antonio.  Events such as these indicate that the pulling and tugging for 
social position will continue, unless, as a condition of admission to Belmont, 
a pledge of loyalty is exacted.
       Portia  has already shown herself to be realistic about human motives, 
and she has carefully looked after herself, employing, when need be, a veil of 

65
56                                          Richard A. Levin


courtesy and even generosity. In act 5 she will attempt to reassume and make 
secure her position at the pinnacle of  her household. Her guests must be 
made to see the wisdom of accepting both the privileges and the limitations 
that she deﬁ nes for them.
       An  eﬀ ective and perhaps indispensable sanction that authority must 
hold in reserve is the possibility of exclusion. Without such a threat, how is 
society to establish the limits of the permissible? Th us, among those who are 
included, some must be placed at the margin in order to demonstrate to one 
and all the provisional nature of social status. Of course, those placed at the 
margin continue to experience to an inordinate degree the fears and tensions 
they knew earlier, before they found acceptance. And just as one outsider 
turns on a still more vulnerable one—Antonio on Shylock, for example—so 
one insider can turn on another. In Belmont, Lorenzo and Jessica, as hang-
ers-on, are least secure, and Jessica is the more vulnerable of the two. Th eir 
relationship is aﬀ ected—their enjoyment of one another and their conﬁ dence 
in one another’s ﬁ delity.
       After  the impoverished Lorenzo eloped with the Jewess and her father’s 
ducats, the chance to travel to Belmont fell his way. A well-born Christian 
Venetian, Lorenzo tries with some success to make himself at ease in opulent 
surroundings. Jessica has more diﬃ  culty, for good reason. Upon their arrival, 
Lorenzo is greeted warmly, but she is not greeted at all. Instead, she is noticed 
as a “stranger” in need of “cheer[ing]” (3.2.237). After Antonio’s letter reveals 
his plight at Shylock’s hands, Jessica makes an awkward bid for acceptance by 
oﬀ ering damaging testimony against her father (284–90); everyone ignores 
her. Later, after Bassanio and Gratiano have left for Venice, Jessica stands by 
silently while her husband compliments Portia on her capacity for friendship. 
Th en Portia, addressing only Lorenzo, delegates authority in her absence to 
both him and his wife. At  last, Jessica gamely speaks up, oﬀ ering Portia “all 
heart’s content” as a farewell (3.4.42). Portia ironically returns the wish, as if 
Jessica’s well-rehearsed speech were better directed at herself, a sad-eyed Jew-
ess. Th is moment characterizes Portia’s dealings with Jessica throughout; she 
always shows “an icy courtesy that projects a very strong sense of distance and 
distaste.”20 Th e Jewess has not been excluded from Belmont, but she has not 
been warmly welcomed either.
       Th e next scene (3.5) opens with Launcelot making Jessica feel uncom-
fortable about converting to Christianity and thereby raising the price of hogs. 
By the end of the scene, even her husband is regarding her as alien. Th ough 
noticing her wan expression (“How cheer’st thou, Jessica?”), he again brings 
up Portia as a subject for praise (71–72). Jessica, standing in the great lady’s 
shadow, dutifully rehearses her virtues. Th e viewer is pained by this but Lorenzo, 
rather than putting Jessica at ease by naming attractions of her own, remarks: 

66
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        57


“Even such a husband / Hast thou of me as [Portia] is for a wife” (3.3.83–84). 
Th e implication is that Portia  and Lorenzo are alike, while Jessica is “dif-
ferent.” Of course, Lorenzo’s remark could merely contribute to the teasing 
repartee between him and his bride. Nevertheless, Gratiano and Salerio have 
prophesied that disillusionment would follow marriage. Lorenzo, unexpect-
edly achieving a temporary place at Belmont, ﬁ nds Jessica a clog to his future 
success. He blames her and makes her feel his own sense of precariousness.
       Act  5 opens with a verbal duet performed by Lorenzo and Jessica, each 
trying to  “out-night”  the other in  a series of allusions to mythical loves. A 
perfect opening for a romantic scene, one might say, but the duet is problem-
atic, as many critics have realized, because a dark theme emerges from the 
Ovidian lore. Th e allusions are to lovers who have betrayed others or else been 
betrayed: Troilus and Cressida, Dido and Aeneas, Medea and Jason. Th e only 
exception—the allusion to Pyramus and Th isbe—seems interjected by Jessica 
to deﬂ ect Lorenzo from the theme of betrayal. And when he persists, Jessica, 
as if covertly defending herself, introduces Medea, who, though disloyal to 
her father, restored Jason’s father to health and was loyal to Jason—it was he 
who was disloyal to her. Lorenzo parries by dropping myth altogether and 
alluding, instead, to the recent past he shares with Jessica: “In such a night” 
as the present one, Jessica did “steal from the wealthy Jew” and eloped with 
Lorenzo. Jessica promptly rejoins that she ﬂ ed because Lorenzo stole her 
“soul with many vows of faith, / And ne’er a true one” (19–20). Th e journey to 
Belmont apparently remains alive for Jessica and Lorenzo. Th e magical aura 
they try to  give their evening as they play lord and lady of the manor fails 
them; a wistful melancholy note reveals they are not secure enough to be at 
ease, loving and trusting one another.
       It  would of course be wrong to give too much prominence to the darker 
suggestions of the duet, for the recriminations never completely destroy its 
delicate surface and Lorenzo himself soon “forgives” Jessica her “slander.” Th e 
troubling note  serves primarily to create uncertainty about the turbulence 
that may lie beneath the tranquillity of Belmont. A series of intrusions now 
conﬁ rms these suspicions.
       Th e family servant, Stephano, enters and identiﬁ es himself as a “friend” 
(26), that is, a friend of the house and therefore a man to be trusted.21 His 
assurances are false, however; he has hidden motives. After announcing that 
Portia will arrive before dawn, he conﬁ rms the story she previously gave out, 
that together with Nerissa she has spent her time “kneel[ing] and pray[ing] 
/ For  happy wedlock hours” (31–32). Th en Stephano quickly asks whether 
Bassanio has returned. Portia needs to know whether she can be sure of arriv-
ing before her husband. Act 5, like act 4, shows Portia gaining an advantage 
through secret planning.

67
58                                          Richard A. Levin


       Missing  the drama pressing in upon him, Lorenzo simply tries to enjoy 
his last moments of authority. Instead of going into the house to prepare for 
Portia’s return, he remains outside and asks that musicians be called. Th en, 
looking up at the stars, he lectures Jessica on the music of the spheres: “Th ere’s 
not the smallest orb which thou behold’st / But in his motion  like an angel 
sings” (60–61). Although Lorenzo speaks as if he could almost hear the music, 
he admits that while the soul is enclosed in “this muddy vesture of decay,” he 
cannot. Th e lines are reminders that in spite of Lorenzo’s neoplatonic yearn-
ings, man and society may be ﬁ lled with imperfections.22
       His  marriage is itself imperfect. No sooner have the musicians begun to 
play than Jessica laments: “I am never merry when I hear sweet music.” Th e 
National Th eatre Company’s 1970 production of Th e Merchant rightly takes 
her remark as evidence of Jessica’s alienation from Belmont and from her 
husband. She has again been a silent listener while her husband displays his 
reﬁ nement by rehearsing his culture’s ideals. To make matters worse, he has 
just reintroduced admiration of Portia (67–68). Th en, as if to conﬁ rm Jessica’s 
isolation, Lorenzo misunderstands her remark and her mood. He takes her 
word “merry” to  mean joyous or mirthful—it  must  really mean something 
more like “cheerful” (see OED adj. and adv. A2&3)—identiﬁ es her reaction 
as the proper one (“your spirits are attentive”), and goes on to  lecture her 
further on the civilizing power of music. Even the “savage eyes” of a “wild and 
wanton herd” will turn to a “modest gaze” upon hearing music. Th e music of 
Orpheus similarly aﬀ ected “trees, stones, and ﬂ oods” (80). Finally, Lorenzo 
says that “the man that hath no music in himself . . . Is ﬁ t for treasons, strata-
gems, and spoils” and should not be “trusted.” Lorenzo reveals here not only 
insensitivity to his wife’s mood but ignorance of Portia’s. She is about to enter, 
silence the music, and put into eﬀ ect her own “stratagem.”23
       With  her every word Portia deliberately breaks the romantic atmosphere. 
In the darkness Lorenzo recognizes Portia’s voice as she silences the music; 
she replies to his greeting, “He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo, 
/ By the bad voice!” (112–13). Not only does Portia allude to cuckoldry; she 
identiﬁ es herself as the cuckoo who will now obtrusively remind Bassanio of 
a husband’s vulnerability. He enters unsuspecting and with a compliment for 
her: “In absence of the sun,” he says, she would make night into day. Portia 
answers: “Let me give light, but let me not be light, / For  a light wife doth 
make a heavy husband” (129–30). Portia intimates that she has in mind a les-
son in sexual politics.
       She has prepared carefully and gains an advantage through the element 
of surprise. Th eir ordeal over, the men have traveled to Belmont expecting a 
warm welcome. Th ey do not know that their every move has been watched 
over by the women, who now lie in wait. Portia inaugurates her scheme by 

68
                                              Portia’s Belmont                                        59


failing to greet Antonio.  A small omission, one might say, but a signiﬁ cant 
one, and Bassanio tries casually to correct it by asking his wife to greet his 
friend. However, she begs oﬀ , saying that her welcome “must appear in other 
ways than words” and she therefore “scant[s] this breathing courtesy” (141). 
Its preamble complete, Portia’s lesson follows.
       Portia is ﬁ rst interrupted by Gratiano, for Nerissa has already confronted 
him with his loss of her ring and he must defend himself, arguing that he gave 
it not to a woman but to the judge’s clerk. Nerissa pretends not to believe him, 
however, and Portia promptly sides with Nerissa, adding, as if for empha-
sis, that were Bassanio found to be without his ring, she would be no more 
forgiving with  him than  Nerissa has been with Gratiano. Of course, Portia 
has long since learned to manipulate Bassanio by making him feel shame; at 
this moment, he must surely appear ready to shrink into a corner. Gratiano 
quickly betrays Bassanio by disclosing that he too has lost his ring. Portia has 
him squirming, and no pleading on his part makes her relent. Instead, both 
women promise to be unfaithful at every opportunity—until their husbands 
produce the rings.
       Portia and Nerissa have drawn the rope tighter and tighter. Finally it is 
Antonio’s turn to be driven out into  the open: “I am th’ unhappy subject of 
these quarrels,” he confesses (238). “You are welcome notwithstanding,” Por-
tia replies, but she continues to give her husband no quarter. Antonio ﬁ nally 
capitulates:


       I  once did lend my body for his wealth,
       Which  but for him  that had your husband’s ring
       Had  quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
       My  soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
       Will   never more break faith advisedly.
           (5.1.249–53)


As Antonio  remarks, this is his second offer to stand surety for his friend. 
This time,  however, the implications are far starker than they were before. 
His first  offer was voluntarily made in the hope of keeping Bassanio. Now 
Portia demands the renunciation of Bassanio. Also, as Leslie Fiedler notices, 
Antonio  this time  pledges his soul, not his body, as surety, “as if to make 
quite clear that Portia, like some super-Shylock, will not be contented with 
a pledge of flesh.”24 Portia has won the day; she instructs Antonio to take 
a ring she has until now concealed and place it on Bassanio’s finger, mean-
while obtaining from him  a promise of future loyalty to his wife.
       Since  this  ring  is  the same one  she once gave Bassanio, it causes 
amazement; and there is more amazement when Nerissa reveals the ring 

69
60                                          Richard A. Levin


she once gave Gratiano. Th e women tease the men, saying they got the rings 
by sleeping with the judge and the clerk respectively—and only then do the 
wives reveal their ruse. Finally, and still  without  pause, Portia distributes 
largesse. For Antonio she has news that three of his ships have mysteriously 
reappeared; for Lorenzo and Jessica, Portia brings Shylock’s “deed of gift” 
bestowing his wealth on them after his death. Of course, to be thus gener-
ous with Lorenzo and Jessica, Portia has been correspondingly ungenerous 
with Shylock. Moreover, Portia’s muniﬁ cence, following so closely upon the 
ring trick and in such contrast to it, suggests that only upon the satisfactory 
completion of “business” is Portia willing to commence celebrating. Finally, 
given Renaissance suspicions about the practice of magic, Portia’s ability 
to, as it were, new-create Antonio’s lost ships, suggests that the power she 
employs to dominate act  5 has about it  something disturbing  and “more 
than natural.”
       Of   course, the critical question is whether  one can sympathize with 
Portia’s achievement. She has obtained Bassanio’s pledge of future loyalty and 
Antonio’s promise to let marriage take precedence over friendship. We know 
that Portia has good reason for making the demands she does. Th e iterative 
language of this brief episode focuses on ﬁ delity and on the swearing and 
the keeping of oaths; the betrayals that allowed the men to  travel to Bel-
mont must now be brought  to a halt. Nevertheless, there is some question 
as to whether Portia’s credentials are any better than any one else’s. Whether 
she broke her father’s will or not, she certainly seemed willing to. She built 
up Shylock’s trust in her, then betrayed him. She betrayed Bassanio, secretly 
observing him and  virtually coercing him  into  relinquishing  the ring  (he 
parted with it, he says, “unwillingly,” when “naught would be accepted but the 
ring” [196–97]). In  short, the greatest winner at Belmont,  Portia, succeeds 
not because of her preeminent moral position, but rather because she suc-
cessfully exploits opportunities that her privileges open up for her. And if she 
has managed to halt a chain of betrayals, it is not because she or others have 
experienced a change of heart. Rather, she has delineated a social order and 
demonstrated to others the advisability of respecting it.
       Except for  Portia’s revelation of Shylock’s “deed of gift” and Lorenzo’s 
allusion to Jessica’s theft of her father’s wealth, act 5 contains no mention of 
Shylock. Th e characters might well have more to say, since their success is 
made possible by his defeat. Belmont’s silence implies that Shylock has been 
expunged as an alien presence; is this true or is Shylock too close for comfort 
because his bitterness reﬂ ects feelings that are present at Belmont? Surely this 
question is in the audience’s mind throughout act 5, since the emotional pitch 
of the courtroom scene is so great that appearances on a moonlit evening are 
constantly tested against deeper emotional realities. We continue to detect a 

70
                                                    Portia’s Belmont                                               61


struggle for  power  and the emotional   lack it  brings: Belmont   is still  unable to 
bridge through   love the  gap between individuals.   Th e play ends with  a force-
ful  reminder   of  this  failure.   Lorenzo,  hearing   of  Shylock’s  “gift,”   expresses 
his gratitude   to  Portia  by saying:  “You  drop  manna  in  the way  /  Of  starved 
people” (294).  Th is allusion   to  a biblical   journey  that   was watched  over  by 
God  and was as much  a spiritual   journey  as a physical  one sorts  oddly  with 
Lorenzo’s  materialism.   Furthermore,   by  describing   himself   as “starved,”  he 
suggests the peculiar intensity   of the  quest—a quest  not for  mere subsistence 
(which  he already had) but  for abundance. He  and the others  at Belmont  have 
abundant  fortune—and   little  love.
        Act   5  exhibits  in   its  most  delicate  form   an  ambiguity   present  in  Th e 
Merchant  as a whole   and in   the  two  other  comedies  I  will   be  considering. 
Th ough I have  not said  enough  about them,  the  scene has a number  of con-
ventional  comic  guideposts that,  if  followed,  make  the action  good-humored 
and joyous. For  example, the  ring  trick  can be  seen as a clever and ﬂ irtatious 
oﬀ ering and not  at all  as a piece of “business.” One’s response depends on the 
response to any  number  of earlier  events; a reading  of  the act  develops from 
a reading of  the entire  play. But  two  centuries  of inconclusive   debate suggest 
that even the  entire  play, with  its massive structure  and  ﬁ nely wrought  detail, 
yields no  ﬁ nal answer. Perhaps Shakespeare left  out  some necessary ingredi-
ent, or  history   has  made the  play  inaccessible,  or  else Th e Merchant is  still 
vitally  alive, giving  conﬂ icting  signals that  are interpreted  in  the light   of one’s 
own deepest feelings  and perceptions.


                                                         Notes

          1.  Norman  Rabkin sketches the contemporary division  of  critical  opinion 
over The Merchant of Venice in Shakespeare and the Problem of Meaning, 1–32.
          2.  Leslie  A.  Fiedler  notices the  national  stereotyping in  The Stranger in 
Shakespeare (London: Croon Helm, 1973), 103.
          3. For  Portia’s use of legal imagery, see the New Arden Merchant of Venice, 
1.2.10n.
          4. For a different defense of Arragon, see Grudin, 57.
          5. Moody, Shakespeare: “The Merchant of Venice,” 35.
          6. Ibid.,  36.
          7. The  first  critic,  quoted in the New  Shakespeare Merchant, 149, is A. H. 
Fox-Strangways, Times Literary Supplement, 12 July 1923; the second critic is M. C. 
Bradbrook, Themes and Conventions of Elizabethan Tragedy, 2d ed. (Cambridge: At 
the University Press, 1980), 102–3.
          8. Consistent with his generally ameliorative approach to Belmont, Lawrence 
Danson, in The Harmonies of “The Merchant of Venice” (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1978), 101, assumes “in charity” that Portia “refers less to [Morocco’s] skin 
than to his temperament and habits of mind.” Danson fails to notice that Portia has 
already used “complexion” to refer unambiguously to Morocco’s color.

71
62                                               Richard A. Levin


          9. Does Portia  test Bassanio or does she hint at the correct solution of  the 
riddle? Perhaps she does both. Two critics have subtly discussed numerous possible 
hints in  Portia’s speeches before Bassanio chooses: Albert Wertheim, “The Treat-
ment of  Shylock and Thematic  Integrity   in  The Merchant of Venice,” Shakespeare 
Studies 6 (1970): 79–81; Harry Berger, Jr., “Marriage and Mercifixion in The Mer-
chant of Venice,” Shakespeare Quarterly 32 (1981): 157–59. Berger judiciously remarks 
that, “having encouraged us to wonder, the script never gives us enough evidence to 
resolve the issue with confidence.” It is possible, of course, that Bassanio too eagerly 
wishes for “answers for deliverance” (38) and Portia therefore decides in the end to 
leave him to his own resources. If, however, the song contains a further, more deci-
sive hint, the question becomes, who provides it? The National Theatre Company’s 
1970 production of the play suggests that Nerissa is of help. The notion is plausible, 
both because Nerissa, wishing to marry Gratiano, has a motive for helping Bassa-
nio, and because 1.2 shows Portia carefully conveying her preference for Bassanio 
to Nerissa. It is perhaps pertinent to  note that in  Il  Pecorone, one of Shakespeare’s 
sources, a sympathetic lady-in-waiting provides the Bassanio figure with  the hint 
needed to win the bride.
        10. Berger, “Marriage and Mercifixion,”  161, makes a similar observation. He 
also anticipates my argument about Portia’s emerging resolve to secure her marriage 
and eliminate Antonio’s threat to it.
        11. The play’s editors are not all agreed that the Salerio who arrives in Belmont 
is the same Salerio who is joined with Solanio  elsewhere in The Merchant; for the 
textual problem posed by the numerous spellings of names either similar or identical 
to Salerio and Solanio’s, see The New Shakespeare Merchant, 100–104.
        12. Ralph Berry acutely discusses this passage in “Discomfort in The Merchant 
of Venice,” Thalia: Studies in Literary Humor 1, no. 3 (1978–79): 13.
        13.  New Arden  Merchant, lvii.  Cf.  Brown’s remarks in  Shakespeare and His 
Comedies, 2d ed. (London: Methuen & Co., 1962), 68.
        14. The Plays of William Shakespeare (1765); reprinted in Johnson on Shakespeare, 
ed. Sherbo, 7:227.
        15.  The meaning  “adjourn” is  provided in  Alexander Schmidt’s Shakespeare 
Lexicon, 3d ed. (1902; reprinted  as Shakespeare Lexicon and Quotation Dictionary, 
New York: Dover Publications, 1971), 1:351. The gloss, based on a dubious parallel 
with Cor. 2.1.76, seems forced to me. Nineteenth-century scholarship on the puzzle 
posed by the duke’s calling upon Bellario is summarized by Horace Howard Furness 
in his New Variorum Merchant (Philadelphia: Lippincott  Co., 1888), 4.1.110n.
        16. Nevill   Coghill,  “The  Basis of Shakespearian Comedy” (1950); reprinted 
in Shakespeare Criticism: 1935–1960, ed. Anne Ridler (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1970), 215–20. For a more recent account along similar lines, see Ruth M. 
Levitsky, “Shylock as Unregenerate Man,” Shakespeare Quarterly 28 (1977): 58–64.
        17.  In  the  New Arden   Merchant, 4.1.379n, Brown  glosses “in use” as “in 
trust” and specifically  excludes the possibility that Antonio  “would give or  receive 
interest.” Nevertheless, the Furness Variorum and more recent editions of the play, 
including  The Riverside Shakespeare, 4.1.380–85n, acknowledge the ambiguity of 
this phrase and of the entire passage.
        18. Moody, Shakespeare: “The Merchant of Venice,” 44.
        19. I preserve the punctuation of the Quarto and Folio; modern editors some-
times add a comma in the second line, after either “offend” or “himself.”
        20. Berry, Shakespeare’s Comedies, 14.

72
                                                    Portia’s Belmont                                               63


        21. The word friend, when not used to one warmly regarded, can be equivocal 
in Renaissance English. See p. 120 and Lawrence Stone, The Family, Sex and Mar-
riage in England, 97.
        22. For a sensitive discussion of the developing pessimism in this passage, see 
Grudin, Mighty  Opposites, 67–68.
        23. Rabkin (Shakespeare and the Problem of Meaning, 18) notices that Lorenzo’s 
speech is contradicted both by Portia’s ensuing ruse and by his own past actions: 
“ ‘treasons, stratagems, and spoils’ characterizes his exploits at least as accurately as 
it does those of Shylock.”
        24. Fiedler, Stranger in Shakespeare, 135.

74
                                 RobERT         oRnSTEIn


                              The    Merchant         of   Venice







Like      most  Shakespearean comedies, Errors, Love’s Labor’s, and Two 
Gentlemen do not achieve their dramatic resolutions until very near the end 
of their  concluding scenes. The Merchant and A Dream have a somewhat 
different  dramatic structure.  Their  climactic  moments of  conflict   occur 
in their  fourth  and third  acts respectively, and all antagonism and discord 
are resolved before their fifth acts begin. In both plays the last act is a long 
graceful coda in which the triumph of love is celebrated by a dramatic enter-
tainment or charade, with witty gibes and affectionate teasings, with music 
and poetry.
       Few endings in the comedies are as relaxed and as playful as that of The 
Merchant. The dialogue is charming; the heroes and heroines are attractive 
and appealing. Every obstacle that lay in the paths of the  lovers has been 
removed, and as further proof that fate smiles, the news comes that Antonio’s 
ships have come safely to port so that once again he is a prosperous merchant 
of Venice. Since other comedies end in less cheerful and harmonious ways, 
it may seem ungrateful to question the resolution of The Merchant, but the 
delight of its last scene depends, not on a transformation of discord into har-
mony, but rather on a denial that any price has been paid for the happiness 
of those who gather on the steps of Portia’s mansion. This denial makes their 
gaiety seem somewhat amnesiac, for they have no thought of Shylock; they 


From Shakespeare’s Comedies: From Roman Farce to Romantic Mystery, pp. 90–118, 255–56. 
Copyright © 1986 by Associated University Presses.


                                                        65

75
66                                          Robert Ornstein


do not mention  his name, though they speak of the rich  Jew from whom 
Jessica “stole,” who has become the unwilling benefactor of his daughter and 
son-in-law. It is as if Shylock the man had never existed, had never fathered 
Jessica, and had never cried out to Antonio and Salerio and Solanio about 
the indignities they heaped upon him. Th e heroes and heroines have come 
through the crisis of Shylock’s murderous hatred unscathed and unaltered—
and there’s the rub, because those who have watched in the audience have 
been moved and perhaps disturbed by the nature of the victory that the last 
scene celebrates, and their memory of Shylock and the courtroom scene is 
still immediate and vivid. Th e joy of the ﬁ nal scene might be more satisfying 
if it were tinged with regret or if it included one touch of sorrow. But to wish 
for this complexity of tone is to wish that Shakespeare’s characters were dif-
ferent in nature—or is it to wish that Shakespeare did not share the blindered 
attitudes of the Venetians to the alien Jew?
       To  some Th e Merchant is a reminder that Shakespeare was necessarily 
a man of his age, one who accepted its fundamental biases because it would 
never have occurred to him to question them. E. E. Stoll has no doubt that 
Shakespeare conceived of Shylock as a buﬀ oon and comic villain because Jews 
were condemned and anathematized by Church doctrine, accused through 
the centuries of inhuman  crimes, portrayed as bloodthirsty in  legend and 
folktale, and despised throughout Christian society.1 As an alien minority 
they were barely tolerated in the best of times and made the targets of oﬃ  cial 
extortions, recurrent pogroms, and occasional wholesale massacres. Th e sorry 
history of Jew hatred does not, however, support Stoll’s claim that Shylock is 
to be equated with conventional stereotypes of Jewish villainy. Th e villainous 
Jew can be found in novellas like Il Pecorone, but he is remarkably absent from 
the great literature of the Renaissance, and especially from the great literature 
of Renaissance England. He does not appear in any of the extant comedies 
or tragedies of  Kyd, Greene, Dekker, Chapman, Jonson, Tourneur, Web-
ster, Middleton, and Ford. Th e only villainous Jew portrayed in Elizabethan 
drama before Shylock is Marlowe’s Barabas, and Barabas serves for much of 
Th e Jew of Malta as a stalking horse for Marlowe’s scathing satire on Christian 
greed and hypocrisy before he achieves a degraded grandeur as a murderous 
Machiavel. Th e only other dramatic portrait of a Jew that precedes Shylock 
appears in Wilson’s Th ree Ladies of London (1583), and there the Jew is not a 
snarling monster but rather noble and forgiving. In other words, Shylock is 
not one of many similar anti-Semitic dramatic portraits that can be explained 
by reference to Elizabethan prejudice against Jews. He exists, it would seem, 
because Barabas exists, because Shakespeare was inspired by Th e Jew of Malta 
to write his own play about a Jew and his daughter. If Shakespeare reduced 
the complexity of Marlowe’s protagonist to a simple anti-Semitic caricature, 

76
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               67


he was almost unique among Elizabethans to use his art in this way.2 Shall we 
believe that the dramatist who portrayed the black Othello as a noble heroic 
ﬁ gure could not imagine a Jew as possessed of human feeling or deserving 
of understanding and sympathy? If this is so, we have mistook him all this 
while—his was not the most universal of minds.
       Th e beginning of  wisdom  about Th e Merchant is a recognition that 
historical scholarship cannot establish what Shylock is or has to be and it 
cannot dictate our response to him.3 Th e attempt to reduce Shylock to the 
bloodthirsty usurer of Il  Pecorone is especially ironic in view of the aston-
ishing transformation of source materials that takes place in Th e Merchant, 
which turns a cynical and somewhat sordid tale of Italianate cunning into a 
greatly poetic, romantic comedy; it also makes the despised moneylender a 
great dramatic ﬁ gure, equal in importance to the romantic hero and heroine. 
Like many other novellas, Il Pecorone tells of intrigue, lust, and greed. Its hero, 
Giannetto (Bassanio) is a little soiled in the working; he lies to his benefactor 
to get money to obtain a rich wife, and when he ﬁ nally outwits and marries 
her, he forgets for a time his benefactor’s terrible plight. Th e Lady of Belmont 
is not a virginal maiden but rather a scheming, mercenary widow who oﬀ ers 
to wed any man who can bed her, and by drugging the wine of her suitors 
wins the forfeit of their wealth. If the Lady of Belmont  can turn into Portia, 
and Gianetto into the gentle Bassanio, it is conceivable that the Jewish mon-
eylender may also become a nobler ﬁ gure than he is in Shakespeare’s source.
       Errors, as we have seen, also signiﬁ cantly alters the tone of its source, 
Menaechmi, by eliminating its cynical assumptions and values and by mak-
ing its characters more attractive and sympathetic. But the dramatic world 
of Errors closely approximates the bourgeois milieu of Menaechmi, whereas 
the dramatic world (or worlds) of Th e Merchant bears no resemblance to the 
tawdry novella world of Il Pecorone. For Shakespeare creates in Belmont and 
Venice a sense of splendor that is unique in the comedies, an imaginative 
realization of  the magniﬁ cence of Renaissance Italy without any trace of 
Italianate corruption. To Belmont come the greatest princes of the world, for 
Portia is a rich and beautiful prize that inspires mythic comparisons. She is 
the golden ﬂ eece for which argonauts risk their chance of future happiness 
in marriage. She is another Virginia, a newfound land that oﬀ ers the spend-
thrift  gallant a second chance to recoup his estate. Feminine, delicate, graced 
with music and poetry, Belmont is the ideal setting for a romantic quest but 
Portia is not to  be won by sighing protestations, aubades, and love poems. 
Who would win  her must make hazard of himself, accept the fairytale chal-
lenge of the three caskets, and prove his worthiness in a trial of mind and 
heart that is redolent of many legendary testings of the purity and dedication 
of questing heroes.

77
68                                          Robert Ornstein


       Superﬁ cially Belmont  is opposed as well as juxtaposed to  Venice, a 
world in which men compete for proﬁ t and commercial advantage, in which 
ordinarily they risk only their  capital—and their seamen’s lives—in hope of 
the fabulous wealth to be gained by trade with Africa and Asia. Yet money 
and contract are as signiﬁ cant forces in Belmont as in Venice because Portia 
is immensely rich and the terms set down for winning her are as speciﬁ c as 
those in any commercial transaction, even to stipulation of the forfeit  that 
will be exacted should the wooer fail to achieve his objective. Th e law that 
protects the sanctity of commercial contracts in Venice also protects the right 
of Portia’s deceased father to determine by will the way that his ducats and his 
daughter may be obtained. Conversely, Venice is not merely a trading center 
like the busy ports of Holland and Germany. She is a great maritime repub-
lic whose inﬂ uence extended throughout the known world, whose argosies 
returned with silks and spices and treasures bartered for, or ransacked from, 
the fabled cities of  the Mediterranean. Th e queen of the Adriatic, Venice 
was celebrated for its music and painting, its exquisite glasswares, splendid 
palaces, and churches.4
       Th e dialogue of Th e Merchant makes clear the opulence of Venice, whose 
merchants are aristocratic in manner as well as means. Th e chaﬀ ering of the 
marketplace is heard only in the scenes with Shylock; otherwise the streets of 
Venice are the places where friends meet to talk and pass the time, to give and 
accept invitations to dinner and festive evenings. Great merchants like Anto-
nio do not spend anxious hours in counting houses, for their risks are spread 
over many enterprises and a single loss cannot disable their estates. With such 
security, Antonio can indulge his generous instincts and be gracious to those 
less fortunate. He can look tolerantly  on Bassanio’s prodigality, which has 
made him as much Antonio’s dependent as his bosom friend. Such wealth 
also breeds a kind of ennui, for Antonio lacks a challenge or goal to excite his 
interest. He has no taste for extravagant expenditure and he does not speak 
of his commercial successes with the pleasure Shylock takes in describing 
his cunning “thrift.” It  would be a mistake, however, to exaggerate Antonio’s 
sadness or to take seriously Gratiano’s boisterous rebuke of Antonio’s “life-
lessness”—“why should a man whose blood is warm within, /  Sit  like his 
grandsire, cut in alabaster?” Although life seems to have passed Antonio by, 
he does not regret bygone days or lost friends; it is unlikely that he ever heard 
the chimes at midnight. He takes a modest pride in his sobriety, even as he 
apologizes for it. By choice or by accident he is older than his companions; 
and by calling attention to his sadness, he invites and enjoys their somewhat 
envious solicitude and ragging. His aﬀ ection for Bassanio, however, is not 
consciously selﬁ sh, and he takes a genuine if vicarious pleasure in advancing 
his younger friend’s prospects.

78
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               69


       Some who think  that  Shylock is a nasty caricature of a Jew are ready 
to compensate for Shakespeare’s anti-Semitism by turning Antonio into a 
closet homosexual whose love of Bassanio is greedy and possessive.5 Others, 
too polite to inquire into  Antonio’s sexual preferences, nevertheless speak of 
Antonio  and Portia as rivals for Bassanio’s love, although Antonio presses 
Bassanio to accept his aid in the quest of Portia’s hand in marriage. Surely 
an Antonio  who wished to monopolize Bassanio’s aﬀ ections could ﬁ nd an 
excuse not to provide money for the venture in Belmont, given the fact that 
all his wealth was engaged at present and he had to borrow money to lend it 
to Bassanio. Without a moment’s hesitation, however, he sends Bassanio oﬀ  
to obtain the loan and insists on taking the loan from Shylock over Bassanio’s 
objection. To all but Shylock, Antonio is the noblest of men, one who does 
not brag of  his wealth  or lecture others on  the need for  thrift.  A  pomp-
ous man would not have accepted Gratiano’s raillery with such good humor. 
When Gratiano advises him not to ﬁ sh “with this melancholy bait / For this 
fool gudgeon, this opinion,” Antonio responds with smiling humor;  he will 
grow a talker for this gear.
       Antonio’s love of  Bassanio hints of qualities in the latter that may not 
be immediately apparent, although from the beginning Bassanio stands apart 
from the other Venetians who surround Antonio. Awed by Antonio’s wealth, 
Salerio and Solanio would like  to have Antonio’s gallies and the anxieties 
about their safety they humorously ascribe to him; they would like to worry 
about tempests when they cool their tea with a breath or fear jagged rocks 
when they go to church and look at stone monuments. Bassanio is not, like 
them, excited by the thought of such great wealth. He has a gift for friend-
ship, not only with  the sober Antonio  but also with the  madcap Gratiano, 
who is ready to gibe at any pretense or cant. He likes Gratiano even though 
he knows his limitations. After hearing Gratiano’s advice to Antonio not to 
be a stuﬀ ed shirt, Bassanio sums up his friend’s wisdom: he speaks “an inﬁ -
nite deal of nothing.” Th ese are not the words of a shallow prodigal or one 
incompetent to manage his own life. Indeed, no one suggests that Bassanio 
is spendthrift in his tastes or extravagant in his entertainments. He bears not 
the slightest resemblance to the gaming, wenching, decayed gentlemen who 
appear in the Jacobean comedies of Shakespeare’s contemporaries.
       If  we listen carefully to Bassanio, we will appreciate those virtues that 
win the love and regard of Antonio and Portia. He is soft-natured rather than 
improvident; tender-hearted, not irresponsible; and more indulgent of others 
than himself. Although  he has no money, he takes Gobbo into his service 
because Gobbo wishes to leave Shylock’s employ, and although he knows 
that Gratiano’s brashness may jeopardize his venture in Belmont, he will not 
deny Gratiano’s request to accompany him. He is not good at keeping money, 

79
70                                          Robert Ornstein


either his own or his wife’s. He wishes to give the three thousand ducats that 
were meant for Shylock to the young judge who saved Antonio, even though 
the judge desires no fee. Having no head for business, he has nothing to show 
for the monies he borrowed before from Antonio, and it is clear that he will 
always need generous friends if he does not marry an heiress. Th is is not to 
say, however, that the need for money oppresses Bassanio or that he brands 
himself a fortune hunter. He  is not  inspired to woo Portia  as Petruchio is 
inspired to woo Kate, by talk of  her dowry. Like Claudio  and Benedick in 
Much Ado, he has a sensible interest in his future wife’s estate, but he speaks 
less of Portia’s wealth than Sebastian speaks of Olivia’s gifts in Twelfth Night. 
Calculations of proﬁ t and loss are not Bassanio’s forte; his appeal to Antonio 
for additional funds is almost childlike in its naïveté and in its shame-faced 
hesitancies. His parable of arrows lost and found is innocent enough, but not 
germane to the case and far more appropriate to a schoolboy than a Venetian 
nobleman. Th e money he spent will not be found again; it does not lie like 
an arrow in the  underbrush waiting for  the keen-eyed archer to ﬁ nd it. If 
his present venture follows the path of his earlier ones, his failure is assured. 
Although  eager to present himself as a practical man, Bassanio unfolds a 
business prospectus for Antonio that is a tale out of Mother Goose, one that 
would draw laughter from any impartial entrepreneur. He does not disclose 
all the risks of this venture, for though it is true that Portia looked it him in 
a way that tokened her aﬀ ection, she is not able to follow her heart. Every-
thing depends on Bassanio’s ability to solve the riddle of the caskets. Yet he 
is honest enough in detailing the odds against him. He speaks of the suitors 
who ﬂ ock to Belmont from every nation, and he confesses that he has only 
a presentiment that he will succeed where many others have failed. His little 
homilies and indirections are not clumsy attempts at evasion; they reveal how 
painful it is to ask for more money when he has been unable to repay previ-
ous loans.
       Antonio   is annoyed that Bassanio does not immediately ask for  the 
money he needs because that hesitancy makes some small question of Anto-
nio’s generosity. He does not sympathize with—or understand—Bassanio’s 
need to “wind  about his love with  circumstance”; nor does he realize that 
his readiness to allow Bassanio to make “waste of all I have” must pain his 
unsuccessful friend. Such generosity is as insensitive as it is noble, for while 
he is insulted by Bassanio’s hesitancy, he will not allow Bassanio any vestige of 
manly pride. Moments like these leave no doubt that it is better to give than 
to receive, and it is much easier to be able to give than to have to receive. Later 
in the play Antonio will  discover how burdensome the debt of gratitude can 
be; here he is too accustomed to his role as benefactor to appreciate Bassanio’s 
feelings, and because of that role Bassanio cannot be his equal in friendship, 

80
                                               The Merchant of Venice                                        71


for the  older man  has the power  money bestows while  the  younger man  must 
accept his generosity  knowing   that  he will  probably   be unable to  repay what 
is loaned  to  him.  Jessica can take  what  she needs (or  wants)   from  Shylock 
without   hesitation   or shame  at stealing  from   her  father.  Bassanio ﬁ nds the 
gift  of love  burdensome  even when freely  oﬀ ered because he would  have the 
sense of worth  that  is denied the  dependent.6
        Th e power  that   Antonio’s   wealth   gives him   over  his  younger  friends 
is matched  by the  power  that  Portia’s father   exerts over her  life  through   the 
instrument   of his  will,  which   stipulates  how  she can be  won. Like   Antonio, 
Portia  is  very rich,  and,  so she  says, weary of  this  great  world.   Nerissa  has 
heard these sighing  complaints   before  and rebukes  them  with  gentle  humor 
and sound  philosophy  even  as Gratiano,  her future  husband,  rebuked  Anto-
nio’s melancholy.   Portia’s reﬂ ections  on  life   reveal that   she is  as witty   and 
perceptive as the  heroines  of  Love’s Labor’s, but more  obviously   romantic  in 
temperament;  although   she has, like them,  a keen  eye for the  follies  of  men, 
she gives her heart ardently  and completely  to  the man who  deserves her love. 
Her  pleasure in her  femininity   appears in  her plaintive  reference to  her “little 
body” and  she enjoys her role  as the beauteous heiress whom  all  desire at the 
same time  that  she complains  that  she cannot  choose whom   she will  marry. 
A few  pious  sentences from  Nerissa about  her father’s  virtue  are suﬃ  cient to 
curb these  rebellious  thoughts,  even  though  Portia   has just  before observed 
that good  sentences are ineﬀ ectual when  the will   rebels. Her  situation  is that 
of the  fairy-tale   heroine  who  languishes in  a tower  and  can be released only 
by a lover’s courage and  ingenuity—a   sleeping  beauty who  can be  awakened 
by a lover’s kiss. As such, she should  have long  golden  hair and  a passive dis-
position.  But  she  is not  helpless  or docile;  even  before she  defeats Shylock, 
she is clearly a match  for  any man  in insight   and shrewdness.
        Th e characterization   of  Portia  is  a triumph    of  artistic  inspiration    over 
ordinary  logic,  for   how  can  she be both   the  princess  in  the  tower  and  the 
conﬁ dent, adventurous  clever wench  of folklore   who  defeats a cunning  ogre? 
Only  an unconventional    woman  could  dominate  the  masculine  arena of  the 
law court, but  only a conventional   dutiful  woman  would  submit  to her father’s 
will  and  not  bend an  article  of  it to  assure her  own happiness.  Whereas  the 
heroine  in  Il  Pecorone is all of  a piece,  a cunning   contriver  in   Belmont   and 
in Venice,  Portia  is  rich  in  seeming  contrarieties,  a  heroine  who  is eager  to 
assume a traditional  role  as adoring wife,  and yet one  who is  conﬁ dent of  her 
ability  to  defeat  Shylock  when   all others  have  failed.  Despite  the  fairy-tale 
aura of the  caskets, her situation   is not  radically  diﬀ erent  from  that  of  Silvia 
or other  heroines  whose choice of  husband  is subject to  a father’s will   and to 
the proprieties   that  dictate  the nature  of  maidenly  behavior.  She waits  to  be 
wooed  as women  have  always waited   because modesty  and  caution   forbid 

81
72                                          Robert Ornstein


her to be too forward. Like any well-bred gentlewoman, Portia’s freedom is 
circumscribed by her position in society. She must marry well, even if that 
means marrying some dolt with  a title  and money; she cannot follow her 
heart unless she is willing to sacriﬁ ce the opinion of the world.
       One   cannot imagine  Beatrice  waiting  patiently  in   Belmont  for  a 
Benedick to arrive while a dozen dismal suitors try their luck at winning her. 
One doubts also that she would have allowed a great inheritance to quell her 
independent spirit. On the other hand, one cannot imagine Beatrice, for all 
her bristling independence, venturing forth as Portia does to rescue Antonio, 
for in  a moment of crisis she turns to Benedick to  champion Hero’s cause 
and complains that she is not a man. Portia does not chafe at her circum-
stances, because even as she scrupulously obeys the dictates of her father’s 
will, she seems to command her fate and does not seem to dread the possibil-
ity of being won by some lucky boor. She views her current suitors with cool 
amusement and describes with mocking satire their chasings after fashion, 
their rudenesses, and lack of breeding. She is relieved that the Frenchman, 
Englishman, Scot, German, and Neopolitan have left  without  risking  the 
choice of the caskets, but her pulse quickens at Nerissa’s praise of Bassanio 
and she hesitates only a moment before admitting her interest in him.
       Portia enters the play immediately after Bassanio’s glowing description of 
her. Shylock, who is to be her adversary, enters unannounced, as it were; there 
is not the slightest anticipation that Bassanio’s need for money will involve 
him with  a hated Jewish moneylender. If Shylock is immediately identiﬁ ed 
as a Jew by his clothing and manner of speech, he is not immediately typed 
as a cunning villain. Bassanio is not afraid of Shylock and nothing he says 
intimates that out of necessity he is dealing with a blood-sucking usurer. He 
walks on stage with someone who is obviously unlike the other Venetians in 
dress and mien, not with a villain who, sotto voce, gloats over the prospect 
of yet another victim. If anything, Shylock seems more concerned about the 
safety of his capital than the prospect of a handsome return. His slow, repeti-
tious consideration of the terms of the proposed loan is the familiar hesitation 
of a businessman who does not want to seem too eager to close a deal. Where 
a conﬁ dence man would pretend an aﬀ able indiﬀ erence to the terms to allay 
his victim’s suspicions, Shylock is all caution, pedantic in his enumeration of 
the risk involved, even to the explanation of what he means by land rats and 
water rats. He exaggerates nothing in hope of greater usury. He readily admits 
that Antonio, whom  he detests, is a “good man”—that is, ﬁ nancially sound. 
He knows precisely what ventures Antonio is presently engaged in, and, after 
consideration, he acknowledges that they do not imperil his worth: “I think,” 
he concedes, “I may take his bond.” Th is does not sound like a man who is 
ready to risk all to be revenged but rather one who has no taste for the risks 

82
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               73


that Antonio ordinarily assumes. He would not squander his ventures abroad, 
and he cannot, as a hated alien, aﬀ ord the luxury of denying loans, even to 
his enemies.
       Of  course, Shylock is not all business. His pauses, seeming forgetfulness, 
and repetitions prolong the pleasurable moment when a Christian must wait 
upon his answer, and the moment is doubly pleasurable because Bassanio is 
so eager, so anxious for the loan, ready even to invite Shylock to talk with 
Antonio over dinner, an invitation that Shylock feels he can scornfully refuse. 
Th e luxury of contempt is not one he can usually aﬀ ord; what he can assert is 
his right to make up his own mind. When Bassanio assures Shylock that he 
can take Antonio’s bond, Shylock replies, “I will be assured I may. / And that 
I may be assured, I will bethink me.” If Shylock’s careful consideration of the 
bond and his readiness to express his repugnance at Christian ways (“I will 
not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you”) are supposed to identify 
him as an unscrupulous but artful dissimulator, they do not succeed; and one 
must wonder why Shakespeare does not remove any doubt of Shylock’s wick-
edness in the asides Shylock utters. Th e worst Shylock reveals about himself is 
that he hates Antonio bitterly and, if he could, he would “feed fat the ancient 
grudge” he bears him. Th at Shylock even now hungers to tear the ﬂ esh from 
Antonio’s breast is dubious. His ﬁ gure of speech is a conventional expression 
of hatred similar to Beatrice’s desire to eat Claudio’s heart in the marketplace. 
To see the half-mad Shylock of the courtroom scene in the Shylock who dis-
cusses terms with Bassanio is as mistaken as to see the Iago who senselessly 
murders his wife at the close of Othello in the petty cheat and conﬁ dence man 
who brags of his duplicity to Roderigo in the opening scene of the play. Iago’s 
progress from swindling to murderous conspiracies is paralleled by Shylock’s 
progress from a proud, successful businessman to the deﬁ ant outcast who 
whets his knife on the sole of his shoe, indiﬀ erent to everything but the sat-
isfaction of his blood-lust. We can say that, like Iago’s, Shylock’s descent into 
villainy actualizes what is latent in his nature so long as we keep in mind that 
the same can be said of Macbeth when he murders Duncan and of Hamlet 
when he murders Polonius.
       Because Portia is utterly convincing as a character, so too is the fairy 
tale of the caskets that hold the key to her future. Because Antonio and Shy-
lock are completely convincing as characters, they persuade us that intelligent, 
practical men can agree to the horror of the “merry bond,” which stipulates 
a forfeit of human ﬂ esh if the loan is not repaid. Th e agreement would pres-
ent no problems if Antonio  were ignorant of Shylock’s hatred or if he were 
desperate for funds and had no choice but to accept whatever terms Shylock 
demands. But no, Antonio is not hard-pressed; he borrows only because he 
wishes to underwrite Bassanio’s venture in Belmont, and he agrees to the 

83
74                                          Robert Ornstein


bond with full  knowledge of Shylock’s hatred—indeed, only moments after 
he and Shylock have openly expressed their loathing of one another. Th at 
enmity is one of the more fascinating puzzles of the play because Shylock is 
not an obvious bloodsucker; he does not resemble the grasping usurers of the 
Jacobean stage who brag of their nefarious extortions, who foist oﬀ  worthless 
commodities on foolish heirs and trick them into signing away their estates.7 
What rate of interest Shylock usually charges is never revealed, and we never 
learn what rate he intended to charge Bassanio because just when he is at the 
point of naming the rate, he launches instead into a recital of the wrongs and 
abuses he has endured from Antonio.
       Is that  not bizarre behavior for a diabolical villain? Does one lay a cun-
ning snare for an enemy by reminding him of the reasons one has to loathe 
him? Not a fawning hypocrite who pretends friendship and love, Shylock has 
learned the necessity of cringing before Venetians, as he does in his ﬁ rst words 
to Antonio, but he would rather point  out the contradictions and cruelty of 
Antonio’s behavior than close a loan at advantageous terms. He could, in fact, 
have concluded the terms with Bassanio, contingent on Antonio’s signature, 
but he wants to speak to Antonio before he makes the loan, knowing of course 
that Antonio  would prefer to say nothing to him  in these circumstances. If 
Antonio were a voice for moderation and reasonableness in commercial trans-
actions, we could judge from his loathing how exorbitant Shylock is in his 
money-lending. But Antonio is not revolted by exorbitant rates; he objects to 
the charging of any interest on loans, even though in Venice as elsewhere in 
Renaissance Europe, borrowing money at interest was a customary business 
practice, which was tolerated though not oﬃ  cially “allowed” in Shakespeare’s 
England.8 Antonio’s revulsion against interest is an extreme form of idealism, 
one which the Catholic  church could expound but which had no meaning 
in the burgeoning commercial world of Elizabethan England, where venture 
capital was an economic necessity and public playhouses were constructed 
with funds obtained in the form of interest-bearing loans.9
       Antonio’s condemnation of interest is not echoed by any other Venetian 
and does not appear to be customary or universal. He is able to champion an 
outworn ideal because he is wealthy enough to be generous, and he practices 
his generosity within a small circle  of Venetian friends and acquaintances. 
Now he stands on very slippery ground; wanting to be generous to Bassanio 
and morally superior to Shylock, he ﬁ nds it unbearable to have to chaﬀ er with 
the moneylender he despises. He salves his conscience, however, by announc-
ing that he would not lend or  borrow money for interest in his own behalf; 
“yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend, / I’ll break a custom.” Since he has 
no compelling reason to violate his sacred principle, he must convince himself 

84
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               75


that he is not stooping to an abhorred practice. Th e solution is to make Bas-
sanio his “damned soul,” even though it  was Antonio  who unhesitatingly 
decided to borrow the money Bassanio needed. His selﬂ essness declared, he 
feels justiﬁ ed in continuing to revile Shylock. Indeed, precisely because his 
moral situation is slippery, he must be unbending in his scorn. He is the kind 
of idealist who demonstrates the purity of his conviction by his uncompro-
mising contempt for those who believe otherwise. His high-mindedness and 
his championing of a universal moral principle free him from  any need for 
civility to Shylock, and yet one cannot imagine him making interest-free loans 
to foreigners or aliens; his “universal” principle assumes a world of Venetians 
and Christians, a world without Jews or Turks.
       Enjoying   Antonio’s  discomfort,  Shylock prolongs  the  negotiations; 
brushing Bassanio aside, he forces Antonio to deal with him face to face, one 
successful businessman to another. His pride in his success blinds him to the 
ugliness of defending sharp practice by citing the story of Jacob. He does not 
speak as one who wants kinder treatment from Venetians; indeed, he can 
hardly hope to educate Antonio, who rated him, called him misbeliever and 
cut-throat dog, spat on his beard and his Jewish gabardine, and kicked at him 
as “you spurn a stranger cur / Over your threshold.” He has been allowed his 
place on the Rialto because he is needed and because he has accepted his 
humiliations as a good Jew (or a good nigger) should, without ever attempt-
ing to talk back, much less strike back. Now he would lift his head and talk 
plainly to these Christians, who make use of him or abuse him as their occa-
sion warrants:


             . . . moneys is your suit.
       What  should I say to you? Should I not say,
       “Hath  a dog money? Is it possible
       A  cur can lend three thousand ducats?” Or
       Shall I  bend low and in a bondman’s key,
       With   bated breath, and whisp’ring humbleness,
       Say this:
       “Fair  sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last,
       You spurn’d me such a day, another time
       You call’d me dog; and for these courtesies
       I’ll  lend you thus much moneys”?
           (1.3. 119–29)


That  Shylock  has not  exaggerated is  made clear  by  Antonio’s  furious 
response:

85
76                                          Robert Ornstein


       I  am as like to call thee so again,
       To spet on thee again, to spurn thee too.
           (1.3. 130–31)


It is bad enough that Antonio has come to the Jew to borrow money at inter-
est. It is intolerable to him that Shylock should expose the false assumption 
that supports his high principle.  That  is to say, how can the generosity of 
friendship be accepted as a norm of commercial dealings when all men are 
not friends  and when Antonio,   like  the other  Venetians, is incapable of 
treating Shylock like  a fellow human being? Since he cannot ask Shylock 
to lend money gratis as to a friend, his only alternative is to ask Shylock to 
“lend it  rather to thine  enemy, / Who  if he break, thou mayst with  better 
face / Exact the penalty.” What  a mind this  is! Antonio  cannot admit the 
possibility that lending money is a business transaction, not an act of friend-
ship, and therefore should earn a reasonable profit for the  lender. But he 
can turn his idealism inside out to justify his present actions: if interest-free 
loans are the appropriate arrangement between friends, then loans at interest 
are an appropriate arrangement between enemies. Who could ask for a more 
high-minded conclusion?
       Shylock, of course, is not morally superior to Antonio. Th e abuse he has 
endured has not made him patient or compassionate. His awareness of the 
hypocrisy of Christians does not prevent him from using his religion to jus-
tify a personal vendetta: “Cursed be my tribe,” he whispers, “If I forgive him.” 
He fawningly rejects Antonio’s suggestion that they deal with one another as 
enemies. He would be friends, he says; he would have Antonio’s love, forget 
past insults, and lend him money without interest. Shylock’s manner is cun-
ning and hypocritical; his motive, however, is far from clear. He cannot hope 
that Antonio will break the merry bond because the sum in question is triﬂ ing 
in comparison with Antonio’s wealth. Only a fool would  dream of catching 
Antonio on the hip in  this transaction, though the dream must give Shylock 
greedy satisfaction. He can also enjoy the fact that Antonio responds as if the 
oﬀ er of friendship were genuine, even though the terms of the forfeit express 
a sickening hatred. If Antonio were more principled—or more sensitive—he 
would refuse Shylock’s oﬀ er; he agrees to it, however, because it allows him 
to take the Jew’s money and keep his idealism unsullied. It also allows him to 
tell himself that his steadfast adherence to principle has improved the Jew’s 
character. Not fearing the possibility of forfeiture, he says that the Jew grows 
kind while Shylock rolls his eyes at the suspiciousness of Christians, whose 
bad dealings teach them to doubt the motives of others.
       At   this moment  Bassanio’s nobility asserts itself. Although he needs 
the money and has more compelling reason than Antonio to deceive himself 

86
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               77


about this merry bond, he would not have Antonio seal to it for him. He likes 
not “fair terms and a villain’s mind,” but Antonio pushes aside his fears with 
assurances about his ability to repay the loan. When Shylock exits, Antonio 
remarks to Bassanio that “Th e Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind,” a 
statement that borders on the fatuous and could be made only by one whose 
high principle is insulated from  reality. He can patronize Shylock knowing 
that his hatred is impotent;  the loan will  be repaid, and if it  were not, the 
despised Jew would not dare to take his savage forfeit.
       Unless we  believe that  Shylock knows in  advance what Antonio   is 
going to think and say, we cannot believe that the merry bond is a calculated 
stratagem, for it is  Antonio  who ﬁ rst suggests that the loan be signed to 
as an act of hatred between enemies. Shylock, who takes pride in his busi-
ness acumen, never gloats over his success in this matter or congratulates 
himself on deceiving those Christians. In his next appearance, he makes no 
reference to the “ensnaring” of Antonio either in  dialogue or soliloquy. He 
speaks to Jessica only of his scorn for Christian prodigality and idle amuse-
ments. Alone with his daughter, Shylock reveals a claustrophobic contempt 
and suspicion of the Christian world in which he lives. His soul is not great 
with evil desires, it is petty in its aspirations and satisfactions. By instinct he 
is joyless and acquisitive, and both traits have been exacerbated by his outcast 
role in Venetian society. He is capable of at most a grudging aﬀ ection for 
Launcelot Gobbo, who is leaving his household to enter Bassanio’s service. 
“Th e patch,” he confesses, “is kind enough, but a huge feeder / Snail slow in 
proﬁ t.” Gobbo knows that such responses do not bespeak a ﬁ endish mind. 
When he debates with himself whether to leave Shylock, he calls his mas-
ter “a kind of devil,” nay, “the very devil incarnation,” yet his conscience, he 
says, tells him to stay with Shylock while the ﬁ end tempts him to go. Either 
Gobbo is all confusion or there is a suggestion that loyalty to a Jew has some 
meaning. Th e unhappy Jessica also contemplates leaving her father to marry 
Lorenzo; she is both ashamed to be her father’s daughter and ashamed to be 
disloyal in thought and deed, but her struggle of conscience is, if anything, 
more shallow than Gobbo’s.
       Jessica’s elopement by torchlight into a Venetian carnival is not a quint-
essentially romantic adventure, for she is not a Julia or a Hermia who hazards 
all for love. She helps herself to her father’s money and jewels to ﬁ nance a 
honeymoon with Lorenzo, and she is as casual in spending Shylock’s money 
as she is lighthearted in  taking  it. Portia’s situation parallels Jessica’s; her 
response to it is totally diﬀ erent. She keeps faith with the terms of her father’s 
will and she makes certain that those who try the riddle of the caskets under-
stand precisely what they stand to lose and win. Her welcome to Morocco 
and Arragon is correct if not cordial. Like Venice, Belmont opens its gates to 

87
78                                          Robert Ornstein


visitors from every nation and Portia treats all with oﬃ  cial courtesy. All have 
the same opportunity to win her, but they are far from equal in her judgment. 
She assures the Prince of Morocco that despite his dark complexion he stands 
“as fair / As any comer I have looked on yet / For my aﬀ ection.” Th is is tactful 
and politic (he may, after all, guess rightly) but not quite sincere, for she had 
earlier said to Nerissa, “If he have the condition of a saint and the complex-
ion of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me,” a casual joke 
of course, but the kind that only  those with fair  complexions make. When 
Morocco fails the test of the caskets and departs, Portia sighs with relief,


       A  gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go.
       Let  all of his complexion choose me so.
           (2.7. 78–79)


This is not a Desdemona who could find  a Moor’s visage in his mind; she 
is very much a product of her society, as she will demonstrate in her treat-
ment of the defeated Shylock. Before Bassanio arrives, she regards all her 
suitors as foreigners who can be described with the usual canards about their 
national characteristics.
       Complexions are also at issue in the choice of the caskets: one of bright 
gold, another of gleaming silver, and the third of sullen lead. To choose rightly 
is to win  a beauteous heiress; to choose wrongly is to forfeit one’s chance 
to marry  anyone. Since the task requires an ability to solve the riddles of 
the inscriptions and to assay the silent messages of the caskets, no fool need 
apply. On the other hand, if the choosing were merely a test of intelligence or 
worldly shrewdness, the fairy-tale quest would lose its romantic aura. To win 
Portia, a suitor must have the right motive as well as an ability to see through 
false appearances; he must love her for herself and understand the intrinsic 
connection between loving and hazarding.
       Morocco  and Arragon choose sensibly and wrongly according to their 
individual bents and unwitting  needs. It is almost inevitable that Morocco 
choose the gold casket because, despite Portia’s assurances, he knows the way 
Europeans look on dark-skinned races and cannot admit the possibility that 
he is inferior  to  them. In  greeting Portia he proclaimed the  worth  of his 
blood and courage and announced that he would not change his hue except 
to “steal” her thoughts. Yet when he mulls over the inscription on the silver 
casket, “Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves,” he wonders if 
his desert “may not extend so far as to the lady.” He immediately dismisses 
this thought as “a weak disabling” of himself but he has neither the wit nor 
the self-conﬁ dence to make an unconventional choice. It is necessary for him 
to identify himself with  all the world and therefore choose “what many men 

88
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               79


desire.” His reward is a death’s-head and a scornful message about false seem-
ings and foolish judgments that beﬁ ts his shallow calculation that nothing 
less than gold could be worthy of  this “angel” Portia. He does not convict 
himself of greed; he is too ordinary, however, to transcend the crass values 
expressed in his meditation on the decorum of noble tombs and the appropri-
ate coinage for Portia’s semblance.
       Arragon comes closer to solving the riddle of the caskets. He knows that 
gold, which promises what many men desire, is often a snare, for the many are 
often a fool multitude that judge by outward appearances. His reﬂ ections are 
impressive in their way, and his choice of silver a logical enough deduction 
from his premises. Since he will not “jump with common spirits,” and since 
it is hubristic to aim above one’s deserts, he chooses the silver casket, but not 
before he delivers a shrewd commentary on the inequities of a world in which 
true merit is often ignored while title and wealth are often “derived corruptly.” 
Does Arragon deserve a portrait of a blinking idiot and a sneering bit of dog-
gerel about foolish judgments? If it is folly to hope that one will be rewarded 
according to one’s deserts, it is folly also to hope for justice on earth. Arragon 
lacks imagination, not shrewdness. He is blind to the hint of the lead casket 
that love involves a hazarding of self as well as a gaining of desire. He chooses 
very sensibly and, therefore, not well. Even so, Portia’s response seems unfeel-
ing: “O, these deliberate fools, when they do choose, / Th ey have the wisdom 
by their wit to lose.” Th e way that clever men outsmart themselves amuses her 
here, as it will again in the trial scene and afterward.
       Arragon’s defeat sets the stage for Bassanio’s arrival and testing, which 
comes even as Antonio’s losses and Shylock’s frenzy at Jessica’s elopement 
are preparing the way for the horror of the forfeit in Venice. Ill fortune  can 
bring a successful merchant to his knees; it is less probable, however, that the 
improvident Bassanio, whose other ventures failed, will be able to solve the 
baﬄ  ing riddle of the caskets. Even Portia, who loves and cherishes Bassanio 
before he proves his worthiness in the trial of the caskets, is fearful that he 
may choose wrongly, and that fear shakes her customary poise. Her willing-
ness to declare her love before he chooses is a lovely touch of incaution that 
testiﬁ es to the depth of her feeling. When she speaks of her desire to keep 
him a month or two in Belmont before he risks the test, her lines are as hesi-
tant and her thought as indirect as Bassanio’s when he had to ask Antonio 
for money:


       Th ere’s something tells me (but it is not love)
       I  would not lose you, and you know yourself,
       Hate  counsels not in such a quality.
       But  lest you should not understand me well—

89
80                                          Robert Ornstein


       And  yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought—
       I  would detain you here some month or two
       Before you venture for me.
           (3.2. 4–10)


Despite her fears, she will not give in to the  temptation to teach him  how 
to choose, though some have found a cunning hint  of the solution  to the 
riddles in the lyrics of  the song that is sung while he ponders his choice.10 
But if  she is going to be false, she would be a fool to risk losing Bassanio 
by using so indirect  a  hint.  Where  Jessica says it is a heinous sin to be 
ashamed of her father and elopes with crammed pockets, Portia will  be a 
faithful  daughter whatever the consequence. She must have confidence in 
Bassanio’s wisdom as well as her father’s because if he cannot by himself 
solve the riddle, he is not  worthy  to be her husband. As Bassanio pauses 
before the caskets, she tries to allay her fears by mock-heroic imaginings. 
He is her Alcides about to slay the sea monster; she is Hesione saved from 
death. She will have music sound while he chooses so that he may swan-
like die, “fading in  music,” if he loses. If successful, he will be greeted with 
flourishes like  a new-crowned  monarch and  with  the  dulcet music that 
awakens a bridegroom on his  wedding  day. Love quickens what  is best 
and brightest in Portia’s spirit; for  the first  time she is not in command of 
the situation and having  frankly confessed her love and vulnerability, she 
tempers her anxiety with humorous self-irony.
       What  was before a contest of wits between Portia’s father and her suitors 
becomes now a meeting of true minds. “If you love me,” she says to Bassanio, 
“you will ﬁ nd me out.” To ﬁ nd her requires innocence as well as worldly wis-
dom, a sense of the ideal in love that is unspoiled by knowledge of the tawdri-
ness of most of the prizes of the world. Since Portia imagines herself a virgin 
sacriﬁ ce, Bassanio must rise to heights of mythic heroism: he must be like 
Oedipus before the Sphynx or Alexander facing the Gordian knot. His ability 
to match Portia’s wordplay about treason and confession augurs well of their 
future together and of his ability to succeed where Morocco and Arragon have 
failed. He approaches his task with a wariness that at ﬁ rst seems limited to 
commonplace prudence. He will not be taken in by false appearances because 
he knows that corrupt pleas, religious errors, vice, and cowardice can be masked 
by pleasing shows. As he continues to assess the choices, however, prudence 
gives way to poetic insight. Th e thought of a woman’s false hair—golden locks 
taken from a corpse—connects human vanity and meretricious beauty to the 
lesson of the death’s-head. Th ere is no thought of himself, not a single “I,” in 
Bassanio’s lines until his mind is made up, then he swiftly rejects “gaudy gold, / 
Hard food for Midas,” and silver “pale and common drudge / ’Tween man and 

90
                                               The Merchant of Venice                                        81


man.” Intuition    rather  than  reason guides his  choice of  “meager lead,” whose 
“paleness moves [him]  more  than  eloquence.” Fearing lightness,  that  which  is 
easily acquired, he chooses the “threatening”  heaviness, the sadness of lead, on 
which  he hazards all. Th e ability to  see beneath appearances that made Bassa-
nio recoil  from  Shylock’s merry  bond  is here conﬁ rmed. He  is wise enough  to 
doubt all but  love itself, which is not  mocked by time  and death as are the prizes 
for which  other  men hazard all.
        Opening   the casket, Bassanio is dazzled  by the  beauty of Portia’s  image, 
yet not  so dazzled that  he  forgets that  this  prize  is  itself  an appearance cun-
ningly  contrived.   Th e scroll  bids  him   claim  his  lady  with   a  loving   kiss, as 
Morocco   or  Arragon   would   have done  if  either   had  succeeded. Before  he 
did  not  calculate  what  he  deserved; now  he  will  not  claim   his  bride  unless 
she oﬀ ers herself, and so he turns  to Portia  to  give and to  receive; he will  not 
think  that  she  is his  unless she ratiﬁ es his  victory. Th us at the  moment   that 
supposedly  reduces Portia   to  the  victor’s  prize,  Bassanio  releases her  from 
bondage to  her father’s will   and allows  her freely  to choose her  husband. Th e 
other romantic   comedies end when  the  obstacles to love have been overcome 
or are dissolved. Here  love  triumphs  without   the  customary  rituals  and  trials 
of wooing,  and  yet Portia’s and  Bassanio’s speeches are the fullest  realization 
in the comedies  of the ideal  of romantic  love. Th e Petrarchan conceits that  fell 
so easily from   the lips  of  Proteus, Valentine,   Lysander, and  Demetrius   echo 
brieﬂ y in Bassanio’s admiration  for  Portia’s portrait;   then they  gave way to the 
lovely simplicity   of  their  mutual  vows.
        Only   a skilled actress can convince us that  the poised, witty   Portia of  the 
ﬁ rst scenes is the anxious, vulnerable,  ardent  bride-to-be    of the  casket scene 
who speaks of  herself as an unpracticed  maiden,  happy  in her  innocence  and 
ability  to  learn,  and  who  commits   herself  to  be  schooled  by “her   lord,  her 
governor, her king.”  If  this  surrender  of self is  an artful  pretense, it  is a gratu-
itous one, however, because Bassanio does not solicit it  with  manner  or words. 
He  does not  play Petruchio   in  a way  that  would  tempt   her to  play  at being 
the Kate  of the  last scene of Th e Shrew. Rather than  conceiving  of himself   as 
Portia’s lord,  he  describes her  loving   words  to  him  after  he  has chosen  the 
right  casket as “some oration  fairly   spoke /  By a beloved  prince.”  Portia  does 
not speak like  Kate;  she speaks like Juliet  of the  immeasurable  bounty  of  her 
love, and being more worldly   than  Juliet she attempts  to express that yearning 
in arithmetical   ﬁ gures:


        I  would  not  be ambitious  in  my  wish
        To  wish  myself much  better, yet  for  you
        I  would  be trebled  twenty  times  myself,
        A  thousand  times  more fair,  ten thousand  times  more  rich,

91
82                                          Robert Ornstein


       Th at only to stand high in your account,
       I  might in  virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
       Exceed account.
           (3.2. 151–57)


       Th e joy of the occasion, which increases when Nerissa and Gratiano tell 
of their love and desire to marry, is brief, for Jessica, Lorenzo, and Salerio enter 
with news of Antonio’s peril. If any doubt of Bassanio’s nobility remained, it 
is erased by his response to Antonio’s letter. He makes no attempt at self-
justiﬁ cation; he does not tell how he recoiled from Shylock’s proposal of the 
merry bond and told Antonio   not to seal to it.  He needed the money and 
he allowed Antonio to brush aside his fears. He confesses that when he told 
Portia he had nothing, he spoke falsely because in truth he “was worse than 
nothing”; he was the penniless man who allowed his dearest friend to engage 
himself to a mere enemy to feed his means. Portia is as generous as Bassanio 
is honest. She would have Shylock paid double or triple the  sum owed to 
him; more important, she immediately chooses to subordinate her rights and 
desires as Bassanio’s bride to his obligation to Antonio. She would have him 
leave for Venice before they have enjoyed their wedding night, for she knows 
that he could not lie by her side with a quiet soul while Antonio is in mortal 
danger. On the surface, at least, Antonio’s letter is more generous still because 
it makes no claim on Bassanio; although he faces a terrible death, Antonio 
would not have Bassanio return to Venice if it were inconvenient.


       “Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my creditors 
       grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to the Jew is forfeit; 
       and since in paying it, it is impossible I should live, all debts are 
       clear’d between you and I, if I might but see you at my death. 
       Notwithstanding, use your pleasure; if your love do not persuade 
       you to come, let not my letter.”
           (3.2. 315–22)


Can  Antonio   imagine   that  Bassanio will    refuse  the  pathetic  appeal 
implicit  in  his  words? The  very thought  that  Bassanio might   prefer to 
“use [his] pleasure” is mean-spirited. Antonio was annoyed when Bassanio 
hesitated to ask for more money because that hesitation seemed to question 
Antonio’s willingness to  give all. Yet he does not see the insult implicit in 
the suggestion that Bassanio might be too busy to visit him in  his time of 
extremity. This is a man who slenderly knows himself and will not see that 
his extreme of self-abnegation must lacerate Bassanio’s already tormented 
conscience.11

92
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               83


       Shylock,  of  course, is inﬁ nitely more  repellent in  his  gloating  over 
Antonio’s plight. He will  not heed any appeal for mercy, he says, because he 
has sworn an oath in heaven to have his bond, and of course religious vows 
take precedence over earthly considerations. Shylock’s pleasure in having his 
enemy in his power is understandable. It is richly satisfying to cast away his 
fawning manner and openly express his contempt for the Christian even as he 
makes Antonio’s insults the excuse for his inhumanity: “Th ou call’dst me dog 
before thou hadst a cause, / But since I am a dog, beware any fangs.” What 
is astonishing is the surprise of the Venetians at Shylock’s fury, for Solanio 
and Salerio continue to bait him in the street and jeer at his misery even after 
learning of Antonio’s losses. Th ey brag to him of their role in Jessica’s elope-
ment and ﬁ nd his sorrow and anger at her “rebellion” a subject for coarse jok-
ing. When Shylock ominously warns, “Let Antonio  look to his bond,” they 
cannot believe that he will demand the terrible forfeit. It is not that they grant 
him any shred of human feeling; they simply cannot imagine that the hated 
outcast, the comic butt, will  strike  back at those who torment  him.  How 
could the buﬀ oon who cried out in the streets for justice, for his ducats and 
his daughter without a sense of shame, be dangerous? Th e Christians laughed 
when he spoke of Jessica as his “own ﬂ esh and blood.” Th ey stole from him 
a child who was his collop, his ﬂ esh; should he not now tear away a pound 
of ﬂ esh from the bankrupt Antonio? It  is  ironic that Shylock’s memorable 
assertion of his humanity should come at the very moment that an inhuman 
purpose is becoming ﬁ xed in his mind, but this irony does not lessen the force 
of Shylock’s outcry. By now he is beyond caring about the Venetians’ opinion, 
beyond wanting their recognition of him as a fellow human. He has tried to 
live with them, swallowed their insults, and put on a false geniality when the 
occasion demanded, but no longer. Now he will be himself with them—or 
rather he will be a new, terrible self—the very incarnation of the inhuman Jew 
of anti-Semitic  legend. His is the hopeless self-destructive rage that burns 
down ghettos and that justiﬁ es a society’s contemptuous view of its niggers. 
Having written oﬀ  his daughter as an irretrievable loss, Shylock thinks only 
of the money she stole that he may yet recover. Th us he is made frantic by 
reports of the sums Jessica has already squandered:


       A  diamond gone, cost me two thousand ducats in Frankford! 
       Th e curse never fell on our nation till now, I never felt it till 
       now. Two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, precious 
       jewels. I would my daughter were dead at my foot, and the 
       jewels in her ear! Would she were hears’d at my foot, and the 
       ducats in her coﬃ  n!
           (3.1. 83–90)

93
84                                          Robert Ornstein


This is  Job turned burlesque comedian, wringing  his hands over his tur-
quoise that he had of Leah. He consoles himself with the fantasy that with 
Antonio gone, he can “make what merchandise I will” in  Venice. But even 
if this  outcome were possible—and it is not—the thought  of profit  is  not 
uppermost in Shylock’s mind, for he will not take nine thousand ducats for 
a pound of Antonio’s flesh.
       When  Solanio and Salerio jeered at Shylock’s misery, he claimed that he 
learned from Christians how to revenge a wrong. In the courtroom, however, 
he does not claim that the injuries done to him entitle him  to mutilate and 
kill Antonio.  He claims only that his bond is legal and cannot be abrogated. 
At least half-aware that his blood-lust is inhuman, he does not argue that his 
cause is good or just or even rational; instead he insists on the privilege of his 
“humor” as if his desire for Antonio’s lifeblood were comparable to the harm-
less eccentricities and phobias of other men, some of whom cannot abide cats 
or pigs or bagpipes:


       So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
       More  than a lodg’d hate and a certain loathing
       I  bear Antonio. . . .
           (4.1. 59–61)


Earlier he would  not listen  to Antonio  because he would not be made “a 
soft and dull-eyed fool, /  To shake the head, relent, and sigh.” By the trial 
scene, however, he can listen to any appeal unmoved; he is even amused by 
the impotent rage of the Venetians. He answers Bassanio patiently, without 
vituperation; he responds to Gratiano’s stream of invectives with smirking 
indifference. He affably counsels this “good youth” to repair his  wit lest it 
fall to cureless ruin.


       Till   thou canst rail the seal from oﬀ  my bond,
       Th ou but oﬀ end’st thy lungs to speak so loud.
           (4.1. 139–40)


       If  Portia had known Shylock she might have been less conﬁ dent of suc-
cess when she set out in disguise for Venice, but then she does not assume 
that she alone will be able to save Antonio’s life. She does not hasten to con-
front Shylock and thereby perform the task that rightly belongs to Bassanio. 
She enters the courtroom only after the others have failed to change Shylock’s 
mind or ﬁ nd a way to prevent his murderous purpose. She necessarily wears 
a disguise to plead in a court of law, which is open only to men, and she is 
content to leave the court in disguise once she has accomplished her purpose. 

94
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               85


Portia’s disguise, like her talk of a religious pilgrimage, is a  convention of 
romantic fabling, not a conﬁ rmation of a devious nature. She is nowhere more 
attractive than in her response to the threat to Antonio’s life. She immediately 
gauges Bassanio’s devotion to Antonio, and she knows he would be shattered 
by grief and remorse if Antonio were to die. Knowing that Antonio’s plight 
must take precedent over her rights she does not pretend to be self-sacriﬁ cing, 
as Antonio does. It is for Bassanio’s sake and for their future happiness that 
she sends him oﬀ , and she goes too because in rescuing Antonio, she rescues 
Bassanio from a life of regret. Splendidly composed in this crisis, she gives 
her household over to Lorenzo and gives speciﬁ c instructions to Balthazar, 
her messenger to Doctor Bellario. When Lorenzo praises her selﬂ essness in 
sending Bassanio to Venice, she replies that since Antonio must be very like 
Bassanio to be his “bosom lover,” she is doing little enough to purchase “the 
semblance of my soul / From out the state of hellish cruelty!” Although this is 
modest enough, Portia catches the tincture of self-ﬂ attery in her explanation 
and adds, “Th is comes too near the praising of myself.” Where Julia blushed 
at the thought of wearing a codpiece, Portia looks forward to pretending to be 
a man, knowing that many cowards and braggards make the same pretense. 
Her host of suitors have taught her much about the foibles of men and she 
will use that knowledge when she confronts Shylock.
       Portia’s dialogue with Nerissa about their trip to Venice, and Shylock’s 
clashes with the Duke, Bassanio, and Gratiano prepare the way for a climatic 
battle of wits between them. Some would ﬁ nd a clash of principles as well 
as personalities in the courtroom scene. Shylock they see as an embodiment 
of Hebraic legalism and Portia as a spokesman for the New Dispensation of 
Christian mercy.12 Th is allegorical interpretation would be more convincing 
if Shylock, like Angelo in Measure for Measure, argued the necessity of strict-
ness in the application of the law. What Shylock claims is only the right to 
“humor” his hatred of Antonio by taking the forfeit that his bond and Vene-
tian law allow. Th e theological overtones and Morality echoes of Angelo’s 
debate with Isabella are lacking in Portia’s clash with Shylock because Anto-
nio is not, like Claudio, a sinner who has broken the moral and divine law 
and must die if  his oﬀ ense is not forgiven. Antonio faces a horrible death 
because the law of contracts in Venice (and all the world) takes precedence 
over humane sentiments. As Antonio knows, the law is the law, and its course 
cannot be denied by the Duke, even if the law permits one man to  have a 
lien on another man’s ﬂ esh. As Shylock points out, what diﬀ erence is there 
between having the right to a pound of human ﬂ esh and owning a man out-
right, as the Venetians own their slaves?
       Allegorical interpretations of Measure for Measure are reductive because 
they erase the drama of human personality and motive in the memorable scenes 

95
86                                                Robert Ornstein


between Isabella  and Angelo.  Allegorical   interpretations   of  the  trial  scene in 
Th e Merchant are distorting because Portia does not  have a profound   belief in 
the ethic  of  mercy any  more than  Shylock  has a profound   belief in  the  sanc-
tity  of law. Imbued  with  spiritual  ardor  the novice  Isabella would  have Angelo 
reach up toward  the mercifulness  of God,  whose grace saved erring man  from 
the just wages of  his sins. Portia  is too comfortable   in her  worldliness  and too 
great a respecter of legalities to  make impassioned  pleas for mercy  or to  ques-
tion  the validity  of  human  judgments. She believes in  the sanctity  of contracts 
even when, as in the case of her father’s will, they restrict  her own freedom.  Just 
as she speciﬁ ed the conditions  under  which  she may  be won, she  spelled out 
to Bassanio the  contract of  love that  is symbolized  by the  gift  of her  ring, one 
that is  based on customary  notions  of  equity  and speaks of the  penalties that 
will  be exacted if the agreement is broken.  Of  course she does not live by strict 
measurement of rights  and wrongs. With   strangers like  Morocco  and Arragon 
she is coolly impartial   in  behavior; with  those  whom  she knows and  loves she 
is unstinting  in her  generosity. Her appeal to Shylock  for mercy is eloquent, but 
measured rather than impassioned in tone. She knows she cannot ask the Jew to 
follow the  example of Christ; she can only remind  him that  mercy is an attribute 
of God  and becomes the kings of this  world better  than their  crowns. When  he 
brushes aside the appeal, she asks him to be merciful only once again.
        Her   manner  suggests that despite  the  terrible  circumstances  she enjoys 
her encounter  with   Shylock,  another   deliberate  fool  who  is found   to  defeat 
himself  with  shallow  wit.  Th us while  she holds  the trump   card—her  knowl-
edge of Venetian   law—she  is willing   to  humor   Shylock  and  disarm  him  by 
allowing  him   to  think   that   she fully   supports  his  claim  to  Antonio’s   ﬂ esh. 
Bassanio would   have her  wrest  the  law  in  this  instance, and  “to  do  a great 
right,  do a little   wrong,”  but  she is above such  casuistries, which  allow  many 
an error to “rush  into  the  state.” From the  beginning  she grants  the legality  of 
Shylock’s position,   examines the  bond  and ﬁ nds it  forfeit,   and bids  Antonio 
prepare his  bosom  for   Shylock’s  knife.  Her   style  is brisk   and eﬃ  cient, her 
only concerns  practical  ones: Is there  a balance to  weigh  the ﬂ esh? Is there a 
surgeon to  stop  Antonio’s  wounds  lest  he bleed  to death?  Her  manner  is so 
convincing  that  when  at the  last moment   she abruptly  turns  Shylock’s  legal-
ism against  him,  he is too  astonished  to  speak, much  less think  of  a counter 
to her  somewhat fantastic  argument.  By  delaying  the blow  until   the very  last 
moment,  she not only stuns  Shylock but  also erases all doubt that he intended 
to kill   Antonio.   Shylock’s  hypocritical   legalism   is sickening:  he  will   pay for 
no surgeon  because he does not  ﬁ nd that  minimal   decency stipulated   in the 
bond.  Antonio   is  nobler  in  his  resignation,   and also  somewhat  lifeless.  He 
speaks of death as sparing him  from   the lingering   misery of  an impoverished 
age, and he is again unctuously  selﬂ ess in his farewell  to Bassanio:

96
                                               The Merchant of Venice                                        87


        Give  me  your hand,  Bassanio; fare you well.
        Grieve  not  that  I  am fall’n  to  this  for you;
        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        Repent  but  you that  you shall  lose your  friend,
        And   he repents not  that  he pays your  debt.
            (4.1. 265–79)


In  his  eagerness to  salve  Bassanio’s conscience  Antonio   subtly   revises the 
past. When   he  brushed  aside  Bassanio’s objections   to the   merry  bond,  he 
said, “Why   fear not,  man;  I  will  not  forfeit   it.”  He  did  not assume that  Bas-
sanio would  repay the loan  although  Bassanio was to  receive the money  from 
Shylock.  He  would  not  have Bassanio mourn   for  him,  only  suffer  a lifetime 
of agonizing   remorse.
        Portia’s  judgment  that  Shylock   cannot take  less than a pound   of Anto-
nio’s ﬂ esh or spill one drop of  his blood  is absurdly literalistic   but exactly  what 
Shylock’s hypocritical   legalism  deserves: he is deterred from   taking  his inhu-
man forfeiture   by the  fear of losing  his  own  life. He  told  Solanio  and Salerio 
that if  they  prick  a Jew he bleeds; now he must  tremble  lest in  cutting  Chris-
tian  ﬂ esh it  bleed.  Yet at  the  joyful   moment   when  Shylock   is confounded 
and Antonio   saved, the tone of  the scene begins to  change as Portia’s manner 
with  Shylock  changes. Is  there  a reason to  warn  him  not  to  shed “one  drop 
of Christian   blood”?   Would  Jewish  or Turkish   blood  be less precious  in  the 
eyes of the law? Th e mention of Christian  blood would  not be signiﬁ  cant if the 
phrase did  not  evoke  ancient  tales of  ritual  slaughter  of  Christians   by  Jews. 
Following  Portia’s lead, Gratiano   begins to bait  the confused Shylock  with  his 
own words  as Salerio  and Solanio  had  baited  him  about  Jessica’s elopement. 
When  Portia  cites the law  that is directed  against  aliens who seek the life  of a 
Venetian  citizen,  it becomes clear  that  Venetian  justice is not  blind;   it makes 
distinctions  between  those who  are Venetians  and those who  are not.
        Th e only mercy  Gratiano  oﬀ ers Shylock  is the freedom  to  hang himself. 
Others  are more  kind.  Th e Duke  pardons  his life  before  he asks it  and  sug-
gests that contrition    will  reduce the  state’s share of the  wealth  Shylock  must 
forfeit  to  a ﬁ ne. Antonio  would  allow  Shylock  to keep half  his wealth,  and he 
promises to  use the  other  half  in  his business only  until   Shylock  dies, when 
it  will  be  deeded to  Jessica. But  Portia,  who  eloquently   spoke for   mercy to 
Shylock, shows no  pity  to her  fallen  adversary. She does not allow  Shylock  to 
take his principal   in lieu  of the  forfeit  although   Antonio   and Bassanio do not 
object. When   the  Duke  speaks of  reducing  conﬁ scation  to a ﬁ ne, she warns 
him not  to overstep  his authority.  He  can speak, she says, “for the state, not for 
Antonio.”   After   Antonio   has proposed  to  give his  share of  Shylock’s  wealth 
to Jessica and  Lorenzo,  provided   that  Shylock   turn  Christian    and  leave all 

97
88                                          Robert Ornstein


he owns at his death to his daughter, Portia asks, “Are you contented, Jew? 
What dost thou say?” Without another word to Shylock she orders the clerk 
to draw up a deed of gift. Far nobler than the Lady of Belmont in Il Pecorone, 
Portia is also far more vindictive to her defeated foe. In Il Pecorone the Jew, 
thwarted of his  evil purpose, tears up the bond and leaves the court. Por-
tia could allow Shylock  to do this, but  instead she insists that he face the 
full penalties of Venetian law. If Antonio, who faced Shylock’s knife, can be 
compassionate, why must Portia now stand for the severity of the law? Of 
course, Antonio’s mercy is itself legalistic. Perhaps he and the others believe 
that a coerced baptism will save Shylock’s immortal soul—that it will be bet-
ter for him to die a sham Christian than a “heathen” Jew. No doubt some in 
Shakespeare’s audiences grew moist-eyed at the prospect of Shylock’s forced 
conversion, but many others, both Protestant and Catholic, must have shared 
their queen’s conviction that it is tyrannical to enforce religious conscience. 
Th e Marian persecutions were not that distant and forced conversions were 
part of  the horror  of the  Spanish Inquisition. Although  Elizabethan  laws 
against overt Catholic worship were severe, and Puritan zealots were harshly 
dealt with, Elizabeth, with good reason, was reluctant to open windows into 
her subjects’ souls or to pry into their private convictions, for bloody religious 
conﬂ icts were tearing apart France and Germany and the shock of the Saint 
Bartholomew’s Day massacre of Huguenots was still a vivid memory.
       Th e forced conversion of Shylock is all the  more interesting because 
religion does not seem to be a powerful  force in Venice. Antonio  and his 
friends do not  seem more devout as Christians than Shylock  is as a Jew. 
He uses his Jewishness as an excuse for personal vindictiveness; they carry 
their religious convictions so lightly that we scarcely know they exist. Th eir 
speeches are graced with the conventional pieties of those who live comfort-
ably in this world and do not worry very much about their eternal destinies. 
Solanio can joke about the stones of a church making a merchant fear that 
his ships may founder on a rocky shoal. Portia shrewdly observes that “it is a 
good divine that follows his own instructions.” When she tells Lorenzo that 
she and Nerissa are leaving for a monastery where they will “live in prayer and 
contemplation” until their husbands return from Venice, we smile even before 
we know her true purpose because we cannot imagine her giving her days and 
nights over to pious meditations. She speaks of shriving only in a jest about 
Morocco’s dark complexion, and she would not be scandalized by Gobbo’s 
jokes about religion. He tells Jessica that she will be damned for being a Jew’s 
daughter. She protests that she will be saved by her Christian husband, but 
Gobbo points out that many conversions to Christianity will have an injuri-
ous eﬀ ect on the Venetian economy by raising the price of hogs and that will 
dampen the zeal to convert the Jews. Declaring her father’s house is hell, 

98
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               89


Jessica will turn Christian, not because she believes in the Savior but because 
she loves Lorenzo and hates her life with Shylock.
       Not  accustomed to agonizing over spiritual matters, the Venetians will 
not agonize over Shylock’s immortal soul or state of grace; his Christianity 
may be sham, but it is enough that they have conferred a spiritual beneﬁ t 
on him  by opening up  the possibility  of  redemption. Portia can have no 
regrets about her treatment of Shylock because she knows him only as the 
monster of the courtroom. She did not witness Antonio’s abuse of him; she 
was not present when Salerio and Solanio jeered at his misery. If Shylock 
spoke again at the trial of the indignities  Antonio  heaped on him, or if he 
gave in the courtroom the speech about the humanity of Jews he made to 
Solanio and Salerio, we would judge Portia’s behavior diﬀ erently. Whether 
she would be more compassionate to Shylock if she shared an audience’s 
knowledge of  his  mistreatment by  Venetians, one cannot  say. Bassanio, 
Antonio,  and the Duke  do  not  murmur  at Portia’s insistence that he  be 
punished, and others ﬁ nd Shylock’s misery merely ludicrous. Once she has 
dealt with Shylock, Portia is as generous as before with those of her circle. 
She refuses Bassanio’s oﬀ er of three thousand ducats and accepts Antonio’s 
gratitude with lovely humility:


       He  is well paid that is well satisﬁ ed,
       And  I, delivering you, am satisﬁ ed,
       And  therein do account myself well paid.
       My  mind was never yet more mercenary.
       I  pray you know me when we meet again;
       I  wish you well, and so I take my leave.
           (4.1. 415–20)


Would that Antonio  were capable of this unostentatious generosity.
       Th e gentle Bassanio begs forgiveness for attempting to pay the young 
judge and asks Portia to take some personal remembrance as a tribute, not a 
fee. Since he expressed his willingness during the trial to sacriﬁ ce his wife as 
well as himself to save Antonio, Portia can, in good conscience, test his loyalty 
to the bond they swore together in Belmont. Casually she asks for Antonio’s 
gloves and then for Bassanio’s ring, a commonplace request in an age when 
rings were given as tokens of aﬀ ection and gratitude. Having set no limit to 
his eﬀ orts to save Antonio, Bassanio is too embarrassed now to confess that 
he did not quite mean what he said. Unable to say that the ring is too precious 
to be parted with, he declares that it is too triﬂ ing a gift. When Portia persists 
he squirms, hedges, and ﬁ nally explains why he cannot part with the ring. She 
should be delighted by his response and let the matter go, but the challenge 

99
90                                          Robert Ornstein


of obtaining the ring intrigues her, and she makes one last inspired assault on 
Bassanio’s convictions:


       And  if your wife be not a mad woman,
       And  know how well I have deserv’d this ring,
       She would not hold out enemy for ever
       For giving it  to me.
           (4.1. 445–48)


       Th ose who dislike Portia speak of her cunning attempt to manipulate 
and dominate Bassanio by tempting him to break his vow. But if domination 
were her goal, she had only to remove her disguise to make Bassanio feel 
overwhelmingly obligated to her. What is at issue over the ring is the same 
question of generosity and indebtedness that arose when Bassanio discussed 
his need of money with Antonio in the ﬁ rst scene of the play. Bassanio, who 
has accepted the generosity of Antonio and Portia, is also able to accept the 
generosity of the young judge even though he is uncomfortable and some-
what ashamed. Antonio, who wondered why Bassanio could not easily accept 
repeated gifts of money, is unable to accept the generosity of the young judge 
because he is accustomed to giving, not receiving, and he ﬁ nds the acceptance 
of generosity too burdensome. If he were more sensitive to the feelings of 
others, he would respect Bassanio’s ﬁ delity to his vow, but then if he were 
more sensitive to the feelings of others, he would not have spat on Shylock’s 
beard. It takes more generosity of spirit than Antonio possesses to accept a 
gift outright. Even though Portia has already exited, Antonio appeals to Bas-
sanio to part with his ring, and Bassanio cannot again say no.
       Th e comedy of the ring episode brings the trial scene to a happy conclu-
sion and provides an emotional transition from the rancor of the courtroom 
to the peacefulness of Belmont, to which the heroes and heroines will soon 
return. Because of Portia’s witty handling of the chagrined Bassanio, Jessica 
does not walk out on stage immediately after Shylock has been crushed to 
join Lorenzo  in a charming love duet. Th ey enter after Portia has received 
Bassanio’s ring and after she and Nerissa have planned their comic revenge 
on their luckless husbands. Ignorant of the bitterness and vituperations of 
the trial, Jessica and Lorenzo enjoy the beauty of the night and add to it the 
beauty of their poetry. Although somewhat shallow and unscrupulous, at least 
about taking Shylock’s money, they are capable of ﬁ ne sentiments and tender 
feelings. Perhaps when Jessica sold her father’s treasured ring for a monkey, 
she did not know the ring was a gift from her dead mother; perhaps she could 
not believe her father could be attached to a gift from his dead wife, though 
she knew well enough his love of her. In any event, her charming duet with 

100
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               91


Lorenzo does not alter our sense of their limitations because untroubled by 
pangs of conscience, they joke about Jessica stealing from the wealthy Jew 
with her unthrift  love. Lorenzo’s memorable description of the heavens and 
the music of the spheres expresses a reﬁ nement of sensibility, not a spiritual-
ity of attitude. He  describes the “ﬂ oor of heaven” as if it had been ﬁ tted by 
Venetian craftsmen, “thick inlaid with patens of bright  gold.” He speaks of 
angels singing “to the young-eyed cherubins,” as if he were describing a beau-
tiful fresco. In the best of possible worlds, the irresponsible and improvident 
will  be dull  as clods. In Shakespeare’s dramatic world as in ours, shallow, 
improvident and self-absorbed persons can be charming conversationalists, 
connoisseurs of ﬁ ne wine, and lovers of art.
       To appreciate Jessica and Lorenzo’s charm is not to say that they deserve 
Shylock’s money because they have an appreciation for ﬁ ne things while he 
is miserly and incapable of enjoying his money. If this argument holds, we 
must agree with the reasoning of Victorian factory owners, who justiﬁ ed pay-
ing starvation wages on the ground that workers would probably squander 
additional wages on gin. When Nerissa tells of the “special deed of gift” that 
Shylock signed leaving all his possessions to Lorenzo and Jessica, Lorenzo 
exclaims, “Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way / Of starved people.” Th e 
age of miracles has apparently not ended so far as Venetians are concerned, 
for God still  watches over his chosen people. It might be diﬃ  cult for Por-
tia to prove in a court of  law that Shylock plotted against Antonio’s life by 
oﬀ ering a loan under terms that Antonio  called kind  and “Christian”  and 
willingly sealed to, but in any event Shylock’s hatred of Antonio has ensured 
Jessica’s material prosperity, and that is the kind of providence that matters 
to Lorenzo.
       All   the news in  the ﬁ nal scene of Th e Merchant is joyful. Jessica and 
Lorenzo are provided for;  Antonio  learns that his ships have come safely 
to port. Portia and Nerissa, Bassanio and Gratiano are safely home and can 
enjoy their belated wedding night. Th e only bar to future happiness is the fail-
ure of Bassanio and Gratiano to keep their marriage rings, a failure in which 
their wives are implicated. Since no wrangling or discord between the lovers 
occurred before their betrothals, some aﬀ ectionate teasing and mock accusa-
tions are not out of place. Having taught Shylock the dangers of a hypocriti-
cal literalism in the trial scene, Portia now pretends to be more literal-minded 
than Shylock in identifying her truth  to Bassanio with his possession of her 
ring. Whoever owns the ring, she declares, is her husband and has the right to 
possess her. With Nerissa, she refuses to believe any preposterous tales about 
rings given to a  young judge and his clerk. Bassanio swears that if Portia 
understood why he surrendered her ring, she would not be angry. She replies 
that no man would be so unreasonable as to want the ring after Bassanio had 

101
92                                          Robert Ornstein


explained its sacred meaning. Perhaps she means what she says, because men 
can reason the need to keep or part with wedding rings but women will not 
acknowledge a debt greater than the vow of marriage. Or at least, one cannot 
imagine Portia surrendering her wedding ring to relieve a friend of a sense 
of obligation.
       Ideally, love does not traﬃ  c with wills and estates; ideally it is unmind-
ful of  wealth or the  color of  a skin or  religious preference. In Venice and 
Belmont, however, love cannot be blind to such considerations, and contracts 
of marriage, like many other contracts, necessarily deal with the ownership of 
property and dowries as well as the obligations of love and ﬁ delity. Th is does 
not mean, however, that the sanctity of wedding vows is mocked by  crass 
considerations. Behind Portia’s pretended literalism is a belief in the literal-
ness and absoluteness of wedding vows, which do not admit of sentimental 
gestures, sensible compromises, and accommodations to circumstance. Love 
is not love that alters when it alteration ﬁ nds, and therefore Bassanio had no 
right to  part with  Portia’s ring nor Portia the right to  use his “inﬁ delity” as 
the excuse for her own bending. Th e Merchant does not pose the higher law 
of love against the quid pro quo of worldly bonds because the bond of love 
is in itself transcendent, a world-without-end bargain that is an act of faith 
in another. Once again Antonio oﬀ ers to be bound for Bassanio’s sake. Portia 
relents, and with the threat of inﬁ delity exorcised, all ends well for the lovers 
and their dear friend.
       Dissatisﬁ ed with  that conclusion, Sir  Laurence Olivier  ended a ﬁ ne 
television production of Th e Merchant with a close-up of a pensive Jessica 
reading over Shylock’s deed of gift to her and Lorenzo, as if she were troubled 
at the last by her father’s fate and even a bit regretful of her abandonment of 
him. Th is note of sadness was moving in its way but false to the character of 
Jessica and to the mood of the ﬁ nal scene. It did not clarify Shakespeare’s 
artistic intention or improve upon it. It was a sentimental gesture that Olivier 
felt obliged to  make because religious bigotry still plagues the world four 
hundred years after the composition of Th e Merchant. Th ere is no reason to 
sentimentalize Jessica when thousands of immigrant children have, like her, 
felt estranged from parents whose foreign speech and ways seemed embar-
rassing and stultifying. In the past century thousands of American children 
have ﬂ ed their old-world parents to become part of the American present and 
future. Th e “problem” of the ﬁ nal scene is not rooted in Shakespeare’s failure 
to see Jessica, Lorenzo, and the others as we see them. Th e problem lies in our 
unwillingness or inability to accept the portraits Shakespeare draws of both 
the Jew and his Christian enemies. We want Portia and Antonio  and Jes-
sica to be more understanding of Shylock because they have so many attrac-
tive qualities. Or we want to be more certain that Shakespeare was aware of 

102
                                           The Merchant of Venice                               93


their limitations even though our sense of their limitations is created by the 
changes Shakespeare made in his source materials. It bothers us that having 
raised a cynical tale of intrigue and sordid motive to the level of great poetic 
drama, Shakespeare does not grace the ending of Th e Merchant with noble 
insight and recognitions. But such recognitions would hardly be appropriate 
when the climactic agon of the play pits Portia’s cleverness against Shylock’s, 
rather than the  ethic of love  and generosity against an inhuman legalism. 
After Gratiano’s Jew-baiting, Portia’s unrelenting attitude to Shylock, and the 
“mercy” of an enforced conversion, any ﬁ nal realization of Shylock’s tortured 
humanity by the Venetians would be a last-minute revision of their charac-
ters. If the ending of Th e Merchant troubles, it does so because it is absolutely 
true to the preceding action, even though it is not “as we would like it.”
       Th ose who believe that Shylock was supposed to be a buﬀ oon, a killjoy, 
and a ritual scapegoat whose expulsion makes possible the happy ending sug-
gest that Shakespeare erred in making Shylock too human and sympathetic 
a ﬁ gure. If the humanity  of Shylock  is an artistic  error or  miscalculation, 
however, it is one that Shakespeare was peculiarly prone to, for not long after 
Th e Merchant he was to make the same error again in the ﬁ nal scene of 2 
Henry IV, in which Henry rejects Falstaﬀ ; and not long after that, he was to 
repeat this very miscalculation in the unpleasant humiliation of Malvolio by 
Feste and Toby. Is it reasonable to assume that Shakespeare made the same 
signiﬁ cant artistic error three times? Or does the error lie in critics’ attempts 
to reduce his complex art to simplistic ritual patterns that presume a denial of 
human sympathy to this character or that?13
       Th e cheerfulness of the ﬁ nal scene of Th e Merchant is very like the cheer-
fulness of the ﬁ nal scene of Henry V, in which the dread anxiety that preceded 
the battle of Agincourt, the moral issues raised by the English soldiers around 
the campﬁ re, and the slaughter of the French are wiped completely from the 
King’s mind. Brushing aside Burgundy’s pleas for an end to the devastation 
of France, Henry demands recognition of his “just” rights because the mercy 
he urged on his adversaries has no claim on him, and his only interest is to 
woo Katherine for  his bride. Th e victory he has won has not enlarged his 
sympathies any more than Portia’s victory has enlarged hers. Although Henry 
speaks of the French nobility as his brothers, his emotional attachments are 
limited to  the happy few, the English band of brothers who stood together 
against great odds, indeed, whose devotion to one another was inspired by the 
threat of the foreign enemy. In a similar way the devotion of the characters 
to each other in Th e Merchant is inspired by the threat of the alien Shylock, 
and their identiﬁ cation with  one another depends in part on an awareness 
of their  diﬀ erence from the many outsiders who are drawn to Venice and 
Belmont. Th eir insular world is limited to those of similar taste and breeding 

103
94                                                Robert Ornstein


who  look  like  them,   dress like  them,  and  pray  like  them.  If   that  insularity 
breeds narrowness and  arrogance, it  also makes possible the  solidarity   of the 
group, its  traditional   civilities,   and  capacity for  altruism.   For  centuries, after 
all, the  little  republic  of  Venice  had defended  its freedom   and independence 
and extended its  power and inﬂ uence because it took  pride  in its  unique  heri-
tage and  place among  the  states of  the  world.   Similar   ideals of  civic  virtue 
inspired  the American   colonists,  the happy  few who  stood  against the power 
of Britain   and  founded  a nation  based on  the principle   that  all  men are cre-
ated equal,  but  who   reserved to  themselves  the  right   to  keep  slaves—that 
is, to  own  human  ﬂ esh—provided   the  ﬂ esh was dark-complected   and  duly 
purchased. Th e mercy Antonio   oﬀ ers to Shylock  is a solution  to  the problem 
of  despised and  feared  minorities,   but   one doubts   that  baptism   will   make 
Shylock  Christian   and Venetian  enough  to be  welcomed  at Belmont,  even if 
like Jessica, he grows ashamed of ever having  been a Jew.


                                                         Notes

          1. See the discussion of anti-Semitism in medieval and Renaissance Europe 
in E.  E. Stoll’s  Shakespeare Studies (New York: G. E. Stechert, 1942; first edition 
1927), 269–90.
          2. Stoll  mentions four Elizabethan  plays that have anti-Semitic portraits of 
Jewish usurers apart from Marlowe’s and Shakespeare’s (Shakespeare Studies 272). 
His footnotes reveal, however, that two of these villains are not identified  as Jews, 
and at least two are modeled after Shylock.
          3. See Lawrence Danson’s critique of Stoll’s assumptions in The Harmonies of 
“The Merchant of Venice” (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978), 133–34.
          4. For a contrary view see Leggatt, who draws a sharp contrast between Bel-
mont and Venice, which he calls a “world  of need” (Shakespeare’s Comedy of Love, 
125).
          5. See Danson’s astute criticism of this view of Antonio (Harmonies, 34–36).
          6. The desire of the receiver of generosity to be worthy of the gift is memora-
bly expressed in George Herbert’s religious poetry, especially “Love III.”
          7. For a portrait of a villainous usurer in later drama, see Sir Giles Overreach 
in Massinger’s A New Way to Pay Old Debts. The malevolent Overreach has little in 
common with the Shylock of the first  three acts.
          8. Although   Elizabethan law theoretically  forbid all  usury, severe penalties 
were set only for rates higher than ten percent, and commercial loans were a common 
business practice in Shakespeare’s age.
          9. See E.  K. Chambers, William  Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems 
(Oxford: 1930) 2: 65–66.
        10. Supposedly Portia gives away the answer to the riddle of the caskets by the 
song which rhymes “bred,” “head,” and “nourished” to draw Bassanio’s attention to 
“lead.”
        11. The  self-pitying  tone of Antonio’s  letter is mirrored  in the  extreme self-
abnegation of Sonnet 71, “No  longer  mourn for  me.” Some critics  rejoice in  the 
saintliness of attitude expressed in the sonnet, but its total denial of psychological 

104
                                               The Merchant of Venice                                        95


reality, its hyperbolic command that not one tear be shed, seems to me to cry out for 
ironic interpretation.
        12.  See Nevill  Coghill,   “The  Basis of Shakespearian Comedy,” Essays and 
Studies (1950): 1–28. More intricate and ingenious in Barbara K. Lewalski’s “Biblical 
Allusion  and Allegory in  The Merchant of Venice,” Shakespeare Quarterly 12 (1962): 
327–43.
        13.  It  is almost  commonplace for critics to  suggest that Shakespeare made 
an artistic  mistake in  allowing  Shylock  to become too  human and deserving of 
an audience’s sympathies; see Barber, Shakespeare’s Festive Comedy, 190–91; Nevo, 
Comic Transformations, 136ff. Palmer, on the other hand, notes the splendid comic 
balance of the portrait of Shylock, Comic Characters, 87.

106
                                     HARRy      LEvIn


                              A   Garden    in   Belmont:  
                      The    Merchant       of  venice,      5.1




Comedy,   at its most typical, has generated an urban and bourgeois—not 
to say a mercantile—atmosphere, in keeping with the sharpness of its satiric 
tone. Shakespeare transcends that pattern by characteristically harking back 
to nature and by sounding what C. L. Barber has taught us to call a festive 
note. Money gets mentioned less often in Shakespeare’s other and later plays 
than in his fledgling adaptation from Plautus, The Comedy of Errors. Within 
its classical tradition love was envisaged as a casual, if not a venal, relation-
ship. Conflicts tended to develop between the pantaloon or senex iratus, 
the angry old man clutching his moneybags, and the young lovers abetted 
by servants cleverer than their masters. Comedy in Shakespeare’s romantic 
vein, which embraces a good many heterogeneous elements, tends to seek 
and find a retreat amid the countryside, in some green world or pastoral 
surrounding where mundane complications may be happily resolved. Such 
is the vitalizing influence of the forest in A Midsummer Night’s Dream and 
As You Like It, of the Bohemian sheepcote in The Winter’s Tale, and of the 
enchanted island in The Tempest. The respective comic spheres of city and 
country are uniquely interlinked in The Merchant of Venice. In The Tempest, 
The Winter’s Tale, As You Like It, and A Midsummer Night’s Dream, the vicis-
situdes of rustication set aright the discontents of court. The court that holds 
jurisdiction over The Merchant of Venice, of course, is not regal but legal.


From Shakespeare and Dramatic Tradition: Essays in Honor of S. F. Johnson, edited by W. 
R. Elton and William B. Long, pp. 13–31. Copyright © 1989 by Associated University 
Presses.

                                                   97

107
98                                             Harry Levin


       Th at does not make it any less dramatic, inasmuch as England’s central 
institution, the law, has incidentally served as a matrix for the drama. Among 
its original sponsors were lawyers at the Inns of Court, who produced the ﬁ rst 
English tragedy, Gorboduc, where the dumb shows were made vocal by the 
parleys of opposing counsels. It could not have been an accident that the ﬁ rst 
English comedy, Fulgens and Lucres, was self-characterized in juridical termi-
nology as a “process.” A trial, being a verbal agon before an audience, presents 
a kind of theatrical performance. Dramatists were apt in exploiting its possi-
bilities, and very notably the Jacobeans, who rose to such climactic courtroom 
scenes as Jonson’s in Volpone and Webster’s in Th e White Devil. Shakespeare 
had his own reasons for bypassing the notorious arraignment of Prince Hal, 
and he showed a particular sympathy for trials in which the defendant was a 
woman and a queen: Hermione and Katherine of Aragon. But circumstance 
could not have provided him with  a more striking confrontation  of values, 
styles, and personalities than what takes place in the fourth act of Th e Mer-
chant of Venice. Given the suspense relieved by such a climax, anything that 
followed ran the danger of anticlimax. Spectators have been known to walk 
out after the exit of  Shylock, and there have been productions wherein the 
ﬁ fth act was drastically curtailed or else omitted altogether.
       Critics  with  an  eye to more modern stages, like Gustav Freytag and 
Harley Granville-Barker, have been inclined to view Shakespearean drama 
as inherently a three-part form. Its pseudo-classical ﬁ ve-act structure, which 
seems to have been rather unevenly superimposed, means more in print 
than it  does in the  theater, though its  amplitude could have licensed the 
playwright to double and redouble his plot. Even so, since its denouements 
can be foreseen quite early, particularly in the comedies, the story-line may 
slacken after the third  act. Slack can be taken  up by directly  completing 
the story and thereupon devoting the ﬁ fth act to  a divertissement, as in A 
Midsummer Night’s Dream. Th e situation would be much the same in Love’s 
Labor’s Lost, if Shakespeare had not overturned it with a last-minute shock. 
In Th e Tempest he postpones the conclusion by eking out the fourth act with 
a masque. In Th e Merchant of Venice the predicated business has virtually 
terminated with the courtroom scene. He employs a brief aftermath to plant 
his motivation  for  the  sub-subplot of  the last  act, the displacement and 
replacement of the rings. Without this contrivance there would be no action 
left; and despite it there have been actors, audiences, and commentators who 
have regarded the rest as a superﬁ cial and expendable letdown. Act 5 may 
be less of a “graceful winding up,” in Hazlitt’s  phrase, than it is—in A. W. 
Schlegel’s—“a musical afterpiece.”
       Generally, Shakespeare’s underplots move parallel to his main plots, as 
with  the revenge of Laertes in Hamlet  or the  sons of Gloucester in King 

108
                       A  Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1        99


Lear. In the comedies, where the theme so repeatedly involves wooing, the 
couples are reduplicated at diﬀ erent levels: Bassanio and Portia never far 
from Gratiano and Nerissa, the four transversely paired as knight and squire 
or mistress and waiting-woman, plus Lorenzo and Jessica on a plane con-
necting the two plots. Th ose two plots are aligned with an antithetical series 
of contrasts between the pettifogging commercialism of Venice and the lei-
surely grace of Belmont, between man’s justice and woman’s mercy, between 
adversary and amatory relations, hatred versus love. In yoking such antitheses 
together, Shakespeare took the risk of letting Shylock run away with the play, 
just as Falstaﬀ  jeopardizes the equilibrium of 2 Henry IV. Th e pound of ﬂ esh 
and the three caskets are even-handedly balanced in the subtitle of the ﬁ rst 
quarto. Th e title role is hardly that of a hero, though it has sometimes been 
confused with Shylock’s; as a matter of fact, the entry in the Stationers’ Reg-
ister appends an alternative title, “the iewe of Venyce.” Th e merchant Antonio 
speaks no more than 188 lines, less than Bassanio (339), Shylock (361), and 
Portia (578), who comes fourth after Rosalind (721), Cleopatra (670), and 
Imogen (591) among Shakespeare’s most articulate heroines.
       Shylock’s part,  then, is  not  much longer  than Bassanio’s and much 
shorter than Portia’s; he appears in but ﬁ ve of the twenty scenes. A succession 
of histrionic stars managed to extend it by acting out and sentimentalizing 
the episode reported by Solanio and Salerio in choric mockery: his outcry 
on returning from the banquet to discover that Jessica has eloped and taken 
some of his hoard along. Th e stellar potentialities in the conjunction of Shy-
lock and Portia gained this play an outstandingly rich history of performance, 
more frequent during certain periods than any other Shakespearean vehicle 
with the exception of Hamlet. Yet it seems to have gone unperformed through 
the seventeenth century, possibly because its mixed emotions were unpalat-
able to neo-classical tastes. In Viscount Lansdowne’s mangled and coarsened 
version, Th e Jew of Venice (1701), Shylock has to be played as a comic butt—a 
twist which prompted  Shakespeare’s ﬁ rst editor, Nicholas Rowe, to confess 
that he thought the personage had been “design’d Tragically by the Author.” 
Rowe’s perception of “a savage Fierceness and Fellness” would be realized by 
Charles Macklin, who  preempted “the Jew / Th at Shakespeare knew”—as 
Pope put it—for  almost ﬁ fty years. Th at archvillain would be romanticized 
by nineteenth-century Shylocks from Edmund Kean to Henry Irving, whose 
“patriarch of Israel” provoked the derision of Bernard Shaw.
       Heinrich   Heine’s  testimony  might   have betrayed some hereditary 
bias, but he claimed to  have witnessed a blonde Englishwoman weeping 
sympathetically over the downfall of Shylock and consequently ranked Th e 
Merchant of Venice among Shakespeare’s tragedies. An increasing pathos in 
the interpretation could be correlated with a broadening tolerance for Jews. 

109
100                                           Harry Levin


Shylock’s hard heart would be softened to  a maudlin  degree in the Yid-
dish theater, and Arnold  Wesker has recently attempted to depict him  in 
amicable collusion with Antonio.  Nonetheless it must  be noted that, ever 
since Hitler made so catastrophic an issue of antisemitism, the play has ﬁ g-
ured less prominently in both the repertory and the classroom. Meanwhile 
scholars like E. E. Stoll, considering historical attitudes toward ethnicity and 
usury, had recaptured an image of the Jewish moneylender that Shakespeare 
knew—or rather, did not know, since there had been no English Jewry for 
300 years. Out of the stereotypes he created a curmudgeon, sinister and gro-
tesque by turns, yet a human being. Swinburne, confounding Shylock with 
Lear, could proclaim him “more sinned against than sinning.” Where could 
the balance between those states be determined, if not in a lawcourt? He has 
been on the defensive after the elopement: “If you prick us, do we not bleed” 
(3.1.64)? He takes the oﬀ ensive before the tribunal: “Hates  any man the 
thing he would not kill”  (4.1.67)?
       Th e poetic justice of the hearing is accentuated by a vernacular echo. 
It was Shylock, hatching his machination, who soliloquized about Antonio: 
“If I  can catch him once upon the hip . . .” (1.3.46). It is Gratiano, after the 
switch in judgment, who gloats and jeers: “Now, inﬁ del, I have you on the hip” 
(4.1.334). It brings home the irony of hoisting the engineer in his own petard, 
when Portia—her plea for compassion having fallen upon deaf ears—resorts 
to a legalism more literal-minded  than Shylock’s. Vengeance has been his 
seething and mounting objective: revenge against racial persecution, revenge 
against ﬁ nancial rivalry, revenge against a twofold personal loss. Shakespeare 
would be coming to closer grips with that barbaric motive in probing Ham-
let’s compunctions. Ethically Th e Merchant of Venice, like Th e Atheist’s Tragedy, 
is an antirevenge play. G. L. Kittredge used to  maintain that  Shakespeare 
portrayed no villain so malign but that he had a case, and it is the losing case 
for Shylock that makes the play so controversial. Th ere are wavering moments 
when the Christian comedy might almost have turned into a Jewish tragedy, 
observed the Variorum editor, charting the shifts of interpretative sympathy. 
But the sexual game, the light-hearted banter, and what Coleridge termed 
“the lyrical movement” of act 5 would be heartlessly de trop if we recognized 
Shylock as the protagonist.
       Sir  Arthur  Quiller-Couch  believed that it had been underrated, that it 
constituted “the most delightful part of the play.” Th ough act 4 is unquestion-
ably the showpiece, its high tensions call for a resolution. Where the urban-
ized lagoons of Venice are precincts of sharp practice, which Jonson would 
elaborate in Volpone, the bucolic terra ﬁ rma of Belmont represents “a place 
where life is heightened,” according to Anne Barton. Temperamentally and 
geographically it borders on Twelfth Night: “Th is is Illyria, Lady.” Portia’s villa 

110
                       A  Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      101


is a haven lighted by the chromatic glow of  Veronese, after the hustle and 
bustle of the Rialto.  Shakespeare commutes in artful alternation from the 
one locale to the other: twelve of the scenes are set in Venice, eight in Bel-
mont. Venice repairs to Belmont in the wake of the suitors’ “secret pilgrimage” 
(1.1.120). Th e successful suit of Bassanio, with an undertone of ambiguity, is 
compared to the Argonauts’ mythical quest for the golden ﬂ eece (1.1.170; 
3.2.241). Moving in the opposite direction, Belmont makes an incursion into 
Venice when Portia goes to the rescue; penetrating that ambience as a dea 
ex machina, she must assume the guise of a man and a barrister. Her juristic 
exploit cannot be scrutinized very professionally. Th e terms of the bond, like 
those of her father’s will, as Granville-Barker has pointed out, are the stuﬀ  of 
fairy tales. “Shylock is real while his story remains fabulous.”
       Shakespeare’s “all-combining mind”—the formulation  is Henry  Hal-
lam’s—could have found  his themes  of  extortion  and courtship  already 
combined in what seems to have been his principal source, a novella from 
Il Pecorone, the collection of tales by Ser Giovanni Fiorentino. Th e tale about 
the pound of ﬂ esh and the loophole for avoiding that penalty had been told 
many times in the European Middle Ages and can be traced as far aﬁ eld as 
the Mahábhárata. But the lady of Belmonte in the Italian romance is a rich 
widow who must be successfully bedded and who has a stratagem for staving 
oﬀ  all except the last of her swains. Shakespeare obviously needed something 
more courtly and more presentable on the stage. Within Giovanni’s frame-
work, held together by the Venetian loan, he substituted a folktale that again 
had many far-ranging analogues and was probably familiar to him through its 
inclusion in the Gesta Romanorum. Among those fascinated by the three cas-
kets was Freud, who predictably saw them as symbols of women’s bodies and 
hence analogous to the judgment of Paris and other myths that hinge upon 
triple choices. Th e paradox that allows the basest metal to form a receptacle 
for the prize ﬁ ts in well with a recurrent Shakespearean theme, the distinction 
between appearance and reality, moralized in such maxims as “All that glisters 
is not gold” or “O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!” (2.7.65; 1.3.102).
       In  the Gesta Romanorum the chooser of the golden casket is promised 
“that he deserveth,” and it is the silver one which promises “that his nature 
desireth.” In the  lottery of  Portia’s destiny the moral symbolism has been 
reversed; gold is associated with desire and silver with desert (2.1.15). Th e 
inscription on the leaden casket in the old fable reads: “Who so chooseth me 
shall ﬁ nde that God hath disposed to him.” Such religious quietism diﬀ ers 
profoundly from  the Marlovian challenge that ultimately attracts Bassanio: 
“Who  chooses me must give and hazard all he hath” (2.7.9). Quiller-Couch, 
remarking that “a predatory young gentleman such as Bassanio would not 
have chosen the leaden casket,” begs the question; for a character necessarily 

111
102                                           Harry Levin


consists of whatever he does and says, and this is Bassanio’s most important 
act or statement. True, he started out by speaking as a fortune hunter, anxious 
to wive it wealthily in Belmont like Petruchio in Padua. But Belmont, unlike 
Padua, is fabulous terrain. Broaching his intention  to restore his depleted 
fortunes, he mentions Portia’s inheritance, her beauty, and her virtue in that 
order (1.1.161–63). Th ough it may be a long shot, he is truly a gambler. So 
is Antonio, whose ventures threaten to be much unluckier than his friend’s, 
since—having wealth and life itself to lose—it is he who gives and hazards all 
he has, both his purse and his person.
       It  has been speculated that when Portia welcomes Bassanio, she reveals 
the password: “pause a day or two / Before you hazard . . .” (3.2.1 f.). Th is is of 
a piece with the tempting conjecture that the cautionary song “Tell me where 
is fancy bred,” which accompanies his appraisal, hints at the proper choice 
through its rhymes with “lead”: “bred,” “head,” and “nourished” (63–65). Por-
tia, however, though she frankly confesses her preference for Bassanio, is sworn 
to silence on the sphinxlike riddle by the conditions of  her father’s will—a 
document almost as stringent as Shylock’s bond. In her poignant awareness 
of each casket’s responding message, she must constrain strong feelings while 
the Princes of Morocco and Aragon are going through  the rite. Th ey have 
been preceded by at least half a dozen, as we learn from the witty and sophis-
ticated prose of her expository scene with Nerissa, where the candidates are 
reduced to caricatures of their several nationalities. Paternal stricture not only 
condemns them to dismissal, but forbids them the consolation of marriage 
elsewhere. It stretches the long arm of coincidence when Bassanio, the third 
suitor whom we witness, is both the ﬁ rst she has liked and the ﬁ rst to opt for 
lead. Th e gamble is moralized by his expressed distrust of “outward shows” 
(73). Yet under the circumstances, and in view of the alternatives, she seems 
even luckier than he.
       Small wonder that when the casket disclosed her fate, one of the famous 
Portias, Ellen Terry, kissed it and sprinkled  rose leaves. Th e complexity if 
not the inconsistency, the moods and changes of her character have aroused 
diverse opinions. Portia was “not a very great favourite” with Hazlitt; she was 
“the most perfect of [Shakespeare’s] creations” for H. H. Furness. Her name 
refers us back to Cato’s daughter, Brutus’s wife, a Roman model of perfec-
tion (1.1.166). Since it  is  she who solves a dilemma baﬄ  ing to everyone 
else, she is demonstrably the most intelligent person in the courtroom. Yet, 
while ardently accepting Bassanio as “her lord, her governor, her king,” she 
has described herself as “an unlesson’d girl, unschool’d, unpractic’d” (3.2.165, 
159). Unlike Jessica, who is embarrassed about enacting a breeches part, she 
exuberantly throws herself into the garb and bearing of a lawyer. Like Saint 
Joan—Shaw’s, not Shakespeare’s—she can enter a man’s world and straighten 

112
                        A Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      103


out its confusions. Her chats with Nerissa are acutely critical of the male sex. 
Yet, under her “father’s imposition,” this brilliant woman can neither choose 
nor refuse her future husband (1.2.26). Such apparent contradictions lend the 
role a matchless range: enchantress, chatelaine, gossip, hoyden, jurisconsult, 
prankster, lady-love. It oﬀ ers the actress, as Hamlet does the actor, an oppor-
tunity to play many parts and to dominate the cast.
       Th e amenities of Belmont harbor no escape from the extortions of Ven-
ice. Bassanio has no sooner passed his test and been certiﬁ ed as the Lord 
of Belmont by Portia’s ring, than Salerio arrives posthaste with the news of 
Antonio’s jeopardy, and the plots converge in the second scene of act 3. Amid 
the goings and comings and the adverse reports from high seas, the three-
month contract has fallen  due all too  suddenly. Lorenzo and Jessica have 
likewise gravitated to Portia’s sanctuary and will become its temporary lord 
and lady during her absence. Here too they will recounter Launcelot Gobbo, 
whose defection parallels Jessica’s—from Shylock’s “sober house” to the “shal-
low fopp’ry” of the merrymakers (2.5.35 f.). Launcelot had introduced him-
self with the kind  of set piece made popular by the clown of Shakespeare’s 
troop, Will Kempe, recalling the farewells of Launce and his dog in Th e Two 
Gentlemen of Verona and foreshadowing the Porter’s monologue in Macbeth. 
Like the Porter, Gobbo acts out a little morality play, in this case a dialogue 
between Conscience and the Devil.  Th e ethical quandary is complicated 
because his conscience bids him stay, while the ﬁ end exhorts him to depart—
from a house which Jessica will identify with hell (2.2.1 ﬀ .; 2.3.2). When they 
meet at Belmont he rallies her about her conversion, jesting that it will help 
to “raise the price of hogs” (3.5.24).
       Playing  the preacher, he has been threatening her with the scriptural 
doom for “the  sins of the father,” unless she plead bastardy (1 f.). He had 
anticipated her unﬁ lial trickery  by an initial   trick  upon the  elder Gobbo, 
who—notwithstanding his blindness—recognized his “own ﬂ esh and blood” 
(1.2.92). Shylock is bated by Antonio’s friends for his repeated lament over 
the lovers’ getaway: “My own ﬂ esh and blood to rebel!” (3.1.34, 37, 38 f.). In 
his vindictive code of an-eye-for-an-eye, this could be a providential avenge-
ment upon his scheme to exact the pound of Antonio’s ﬂ esh, while neglecting 
the blood. Jessica’s rejection may be contrasted with Portia’s acceptance of 
her defunct father’s legalisms. Rather than undergo the ordeal of the cas-
kets, Lorenzo has merely to catch the casket of jewels tossed down by Jessica 
(2.6.33). Shylock’s immediate reactions, as reported, verge on sheer bathos. 
Since he equates his daughter with his ducats, and her apostasy with his pre-
cious stones, the Venetian boys seem justiﬁ ed in jeering at his outcries (3.8.15 
ﬀ .). When we see and hear him at ﬁ rst hand, he is oscillating grotesquely 
between grief over his losses and joy over Antonio’s, equating his lost diamond 

113
104                                           Harry Levin


with the curse upon his race, and calling simultaneously for the return of the 
booty and for Jessica’s demise (3.1.85–90). Th ese monetary reductions cannot 
seriously have been meant to engage our sympathies.
       Yet, when he learns that Jessica has frivolously bartered away his tur-
quoise ring for a monkey, Shakespeare accords him one touch of common 
humanity, wryly voiced: “ . . . I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor. I would 
not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys” (121–23). For an instant we 
are startled by a glimpse of Shylock as a loving husband, even as we glimpse 
the ghost of  a dutiful  daughter in Lady  Macbeth’s hesitation at Duncan’s 
fatal bedside: “Had he not resembled / My father as he slept, I had done’t.” 
Jessica has been criticized severely as a minx, a shameless hussy, the most 
undutiful of daughters, and Lorenzo has fared no better for supposedly lead-
ing her astray. Th ematically she reverses the dark legend of the Jew’s daughter, 
utilized to decoy Christian youths toward their ritual murder, which ﬂ owers 
into a miracle in the narration of Chaucer’s Prioress or the ballads about Saint 
Hugh of  Lincoln. Shakespeare had a nearer precedent in Marlowe’s Jew of 
Malta, where Abigail revolts against her plight, is converted to Christianity, 
and becomes one of her father’s innumerable victims. Barabas, the latter, can 
be taken as the cynical measure of Shylock’s credibility, since his monstrous 
vendetta is wholly animated by the lust for gold and for the power it confers. 
His amoral and esthetic paean—“O girl! O gold! O beauty! O my bliss!”—is 
grimly echoed by Shylock’s jeremiad over his daughter and his ducats.
       Jessica would suﬀ er by comparison with the  pathetic Abigail,  if  Th e 
Merchant of Venice were a tragedy. But since it was framed to be a comedy, 
albeit with  a diﬀ erence, she need not be blamed for surviving to grace the 
charmed circle of Belmont. Since Shakespeare has treated her sympatheti-
cally, we ought not to  treat her antipathetically  unless we are prepared to 
censure him. When her prototypes—in works of ﬁ ction that must have inﬂ u-
enced him—help themselves at the expense of their usurer-fathers, they are 
turning ill-gotten  gains into  merited dowries. Her scriptural precursor was 
Rachel, in the book of Genesis, stealing the paternal eﬃ  gies. Jessica’s ﬂ ight is 
essentially a liberation and not a desertion, though it may not seem to be so 
in the light  of latter-day broad-mindedness. From a strictly historical view-
point, she has been an inﬁ del, born and bred outside the one true faith, and 
therefore ineligible for salvation. Yet the Christians seem to accept her as an 
anima naturaliter christiana; and Gratiano, with a pun on Gentile, declares her 
“a gentle, and no Jew” (2.5.51). Her baptism, the prerequisite of marriage to 
Lorenzo, will assure her progress through this world into the next. Such pre-
sumptions may not jibe with ours, and certainly do not accord with Shylock’s. 
Antonio’s high-minded stipulation, that “he presently become a Christian,” is 
not likely to have been received as a spiritual favor (4.1.387).

114
                       A  Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      105


       With  due respect for intellectual background, we should not overstress it 
to the neglect of dramatic foreground. In characterizing a Jewish outlook and 
idiom, Shakespeare drew concretely on the Old Testament here and there. 
But it  asks for too much from  Belmont, in any excepting the most loosely 
general terms, to argue that act 5 is imbued with the spirit of the New Tes-
tament. A current tendency of criticism, and of production as well, seeks to 
invest even Shakespeare’s lighter comedies with an aura of solemnity. Th ough 
Th e Merchant of Venice is by no means light in its implications, it still adheres 
to the nature of the comic genre by indulging the pleasure principle, which 
is destined to enjoy the ﬁ nal triumph. Th ough Jessica and Lorenzo cannot 
be absolved from the taints of frivolity and extravagance, these are qualities 
that thrive in the purlieus of high comedy. Lorenzo’s metaphor, “For the close 
night doth play the runaway,” has been acted out in the haste of their min-
iature balcony scene (2.6.47). United with her in the security and serenity of 
Portia’s country estate, he will retrospectively evoke that runaway evening:


             In  such a night
       Did  Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
       And  with an unthrift  love did run from Venice
       As far as Belmont.
           (5.1.14–17)


The  verb steal is his  ambiguous acknowledgment that,  in  their  stealthy 
departure they have burglarized  Shylock’s ghetto  dwelling.  And  Jessica, 
in her gently mocking  rejoinder, linking  crime and religion  with  love in a 
metaphysical conceit, will take  note of Lorenzo’s gallantry,  “Stealing  her 
soul with many vows of faith” (19).
       Th e bitterest blow to fall upon Shylock has been their “unthrift  love.” 
Wider than  the religious distance between them is the opposition between 
that inveterate miser and this pair of spendthrifts who can lavish fourscore 
of his austerely hoarded ducats upon a single frolicsome occasion. Comedy, 
opposed to the asceticism of hoarding, sides implicitly with the hedonism of 
spending: with the handout as opposed to the hold-in.  Liberality, in Aris-
totelian ethics, is deﬁ ned as a mean between the extremes of avarice and 
prodigality. Prodigality, though rather a vice than a virtue, can be construed 
as the amiable weakness of beautiful people. Bassanio has embarked upon his 
speculative adventure because his debts have become “something too prodi-
gal” (1.1.129). Shylock tolerates his hospitality, contrary to ethnic principles, 
so that he may ambiguously and ominously “feed upon / Th e prodigal Chris-
tian” (2.5.14 f.). Antonio, when facing his  apparent losses at sea, is prema-
turely and unjustly stigmatized by Shylock as “a bankrout, a prodigal” (3.1.44 

115
106                                           Harry Levin


f.). Gratiano, embroidering on the parable, has likened the fortunes of love to 
those of a maritime enterprise:


       How  like a younger or a prodigal
       Th e scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
       Hugg’d and embraced by the strumpet wind!


This fickle  metaphor proceeds to veer about and present, for a crucial inter-
val, a portent of failure:


       How  like the prodigal doth she return,
       With   over-weather’d ribs and ragged sails,
       Lean, rent, and beggar’d by the strumpet wind!
           (2.6.14–19)


There can and will   be further  and happier  fluctuations in  the  long run. 
The wind, ancillary to the bitch-goddess Fortune, will change again. In the 
mean time enough has been adumbrated to prepare the way for a season of 
homecoming, forgiveness, and fatted calf.
       Th e setting for that reunion  has been located by most editors in “the 
avenue before Portia’s house”—avenue in its horticultural aspect. Th eobald 
would specify “a Grove or Green place”; and the script makes clear that the 
resident lovers are waiting there to  welcome the returning  parties on, we 
might well imagine, a terrace of some sort. A garden, we are never allowed 
to forget, symbolizes the conceptual norm of Shakespeare’s imagery. “Our 
bodies are our gardens,” says Iago. Flowers provide an emblematic language 
for Ophelia’s madness, weeds for Lear’s. A literal gardener, in Richard II, pro-
pounds an allegorical object lesson in statecraft for “our sea-walled garden,” 
England. Th e Wars of the Roses break out when Yorkists and Lancastrians 
angrily pluck their ﬂ oral emblems in the Temple Garden. Jack Cade’s rebel-
lion peters out when the rebel leader is run to  earth in a peaceful Kentish 
garden. Th e Duke of Burgundy points a concluding moral in Henry V: van-
quished France is “this best garden of the world,” whose cultivation should 
bring peace and plenty—a hopeful prospect not to be attained. Since it  is 
past nightfall in Portia’s garden, no attempt is made to describe the foliage; 
when Oberon evoked the wild thyme and nodding violets on the bank where 
Titania lay asleep, the resulting sensation was as tactile and olfactory as it was 
visual. Here the main problem for Shakespeare was to convey an impression 
of nighttime while the performance was taking place in the daytime.
       It  may have neutralized disparities for Lorenzo to  begin the scene by 
observing “Th e moon shines bright” (5.1.1). Th is is the  starting point  of 

116
                       A  Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      107


the lyrical nightpiece together, “In such a night as this . . . ,” invoking clas-
sic myths of moonlit  assignations. Its counterpart in Romeo and Juliet is an 
aubade, the duet between lovers parting at dawn, under the dialectical patron-
age of the lark and the nightingale. Th e literary examples cited by Lorenzo 
and Jessica, which derive from Chaucer and Ovid, prove to be more ominous 
than encouraging. Troilus and Cressida would become the most problematic 
of Shakespeare’s couples. Pyramus and Th isbe he had lately been reducing to 
burlesque in A Midsummer Night’s Dream and transmuting into tragedy in 
Romeo and Juliet. Dido, if she was one of Cupid’s saints, had become a martyr. 
Medea was a femme fatale with a fearsome record, whose nocturnal rendez-
vous with Jason was not a tryst but  a spell of  ghoulish witchcraft.  When 
Berlioz was writing his libretto for Th e Trojans, he would stray from its Virgil-
ian source to his cherished Shakespeare and base the lyrics for his love duet 
on this exchange of Jessica’s and Lorenzo’s. Since the singers are Dido and 
Aeneas, they cannot instance themselves, but they can invoke—more appro-
priately than Th isbe and Medea—Venus and Diana. One set of role models is 
twice called upon. “In such a night,” Lorenzo whispers,


       Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls
       And  sigh’d his soul toward the Grecian tents,
       Where Cressid lay that night.
           (3–6)


This  is  much  less auspicious than the  operatic  allusion,  since she has 
betrayed him with Diomedes, and he is full of jealousy and sorrow, whereas 
Aeneas pictures the lover awaiting his beloved in the joyous expectation of 
fulfilment:


       Par une telle nuit, fou d’amour et de foie,
       Troïlus vint attendre aux pieds des murs de Troie
       La  belle Cresside.


The  auspices look better,  but  the outcome  will   be tragic,  whereas the 
omens in The Merchant of Venice are passing clouds in a benevolent sky. 
When Rosalind, disguised as a pert youth, instances “the patterns of love” 
in As You Like It,  she too cites Troilus  along with  the  equally ill-starred 
Leander. Her  sardonic point is  that,  although they  died, it  was “not  for 
love.” Love may be a universal experience, but it can be less exalting than 
such romantics as Orlando naively profess. So Jessica and Lorenzo, having 
striven to “out-night”  one another, terminate their litany with  an exchange 
of good-humored mutual reservations (23). Functionally, as the stagewise 

117
108                                           Harry Levin


Granville-Barker could  show, their antiphonal  stanzas have sustained the 
continuity while Portia and Nerissa were changing back from lawyers’ robes 
to feminine attire.
       Jessica and Lorenzo are symmetrically interrupted by  the messenger 
Stephano, with his alibi for the arrival of Portia after her pretended pilgrim-
age, and by the redomesticated Gobbo, mimicking the posthorn that has her-
alded the coming of Bassanio. Th ere is a brief interlude of anticipation, ﬁ lled 
by Lorenzo:


       How  sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
       Here will  we sit, and let the sounds of music
       Creep in our ears. Soft stillness and the night
       Become the touches of sweet harmony.
           (54–57)


What stays visible, upward not earthward, is seen in configurations of dark-
ness and light: the sky and the stars, “the floor of heaven” and the “patens of 
bright gold” (58, 59) that shine through it.  These are synesthetically trans-
posed into aural images; and if the singing of angelic choirs is inaudible to 
mortal ears, like the music of the spheres, corporeal musicians can be sum-
moned to “wake Diana  with  a hymn” (66). The  moon—another amorous 
predecessor, sleeping with Endymion—must by now have discreetly passed 
behind a cloud (109). The intensive lyricism of this act, composed wholly in 
verse, with sound effects and an orchestral nocturne, makes it an appropriate 
sounding board for Shakespeare’s tribute to “the sweet power of music” (79). 
Jessica’s confession, “I am never merry when I hear sweet music,” contrib-
utes to the bittersweet mood of the play (69). And Lorenzo’s ensuing eulogy 
draws upon both Orphic and Pythagorean traditions to affirm the civilizing 
functions of harmony and to portend a harmonious resolution. Some of the 
critics’ efforts to put him down as a mere wastrel should be weighed against 
his humane criterion:


       Th e man that hath no music in himself,
       Nor  is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
       Is ﬁ t for treasons, stratagems, and spoils . . .
       Let  no such man be trusted.
           (83–88)


Shylock happens to be such a man, who, in  his  suspicion of the masked 
revellers, has admonished Jessica against “the drum / And the vile squeal-
ing of the  wry-neck’d fife”  (2.5.29, 30). And  though  for him  the bagpipe 

118
                        A Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      109


exemplifies an  irrational   dislike,  it   could  likewise  represent the  harsh 
cacophony of his own temperament (4.1.49, 56).
        Th e scenes at Belmont, on the other hand, are counterpointed by melo-
dious fanfares and enhanced with musical accompaniment at two turning 
points: Bassanio’s decision and Portia’s reentry. It is signiﬁ cant that although 
Shakespeare fondly and frequently alludes to music throughout his work, he 
uses the word itself in Th e Merchant of Venice more often than anywhere else: 
ﬁ fteen times, eleven of them in the last act alone. Browsing through Professor 
Spevack’s concordance aﬀ ords a convenient and suggestive method of trac-
ing Shakespeare’s thematic concerns, as they have been verbally orchestrated. 
Among the other  words we note that reach their highest frequency in this 
play are Jew (69 times), bond (39), ring (38), choose (35), judge (24), ﬂ esh (23), 
Christian (22), forfeit/forfeiture (19), casket (13), and hazard (11). Th e inci-
dence is high with law  (19), justice (15), and mercy (13), yet not as high as 
in Measure for Measure, where comparable issues are at stake (29, 26, and 16 
respectively). All of these are key words instrumental to the plot, denoting its 
situations and interactions. Th e excessive repetition of the brusque monosyl-
lable Jew, rasping across the rift that divides the dramatis personae, empha-
sizes the alien status of Shylock and the routine contempt of his interlocutors. 
But the iteration of music comes as an extra embellishment, not less welcome 
because it transposes the mode.
       After  the discords of Venice we arrive at the concord of Belmont. Th e 
Venetian masque was hastily dropped with the suburban ﬂ ight of act 2; the 
celebration over the oﬀ stage marriages in act 3 had to be put oﬀ  for the litiga-
tion of act 4. Ordeals are duly overtaken by revels, with the grand ﬁ nale of act 
5, carrying out the mischievous scenario that Portia has spontaneously devised 
while pursuing her legal career. Day is the time for aﬀ airs of business, night for 
escapades of imagination. It is dark when she enters, but not too dark, no more 
than “the daylight sick” (5.1.124). Her colloquy with Nerissa, like the preced-
ing repartee of Jessica and Lorenzo, trips along from images of light to those 
of sound. Relativistic comparisons—beginning with the moon and the candle, 
moving on to the lark and the crow and other birds, and culminating in the day 
and the night—lead into a brittle sequence of sententious quips.


        How far this little  candle throws his beams!
        So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
           (90 f.)


This motif of glimmering through the darkness, figuratively as well as physi-
cally, pervades the entire scene. “Everything in its season” is the burden of her 
remarks, signalizing both the round of the seasons and their seasoning effect 

119
110                                           Harry Levin


upon those who have weathered them (107 f.). Gradually she is discerned and 
greeted by Lorenzo, just as the trumpet announced the entrance of Bassanio’s 
party. Gradually picking up her train of thought, he hails her with a trope of 
solar brilliance. She acknowledges the standard compliment with a standard 
quibble on light, connoting loose behavior as well as illumination, and thereby 
interjecting a coquettish hint of marital infidelity (129–31).
       He  proceeds to introduce the guest of  honor, Antonio, who  has cel-
ebrated his acquittal by crossing from Venice to  Belmont: “the  man . . . / 
To whom I  am so inﬁ nitely  bound.” Bassanio has always been attached to 
Antonio; moreover, he is now doubly indebted to him, in the deepest conceiv-
able sense; and Portia’s reply adds a trenchant reminder of the contract in the 
recent law case:


       You should in all sense be much bound to him,
       For as I hear he was much bound for you.
           (134–37)


The energy of  the monosyllables is reinforced by  the parallellism  of  the 
lines, the  catchword occupying  the same position  in  both  and  control-
ling the  transposition from “him”  to  “you.” We are reminded of  Shylock’s 
laconic and equivocal answer to Bassanio at the very outset: “Antonio shall 
become bound, well” (1.3.6). At the height of his pride, when he had all but 
succeeded in fatally binding Antonio,   Shylock rebuffed Bassanio’s appeal 
by asserting his own independence: “I am  not bound to  please thee with 
my answers” (4.1.65). His  insistence on the  bond  reechoed through the 
court, accentuated by that device which the rhetoricians term epistrophe, the 
repeated locution at the end of a line. “Is it so nominated in the bond” (259)? 
Could any rhetorical question have been more implacable? Shylock’s house-
hold wisdom was summed up when he ordered Jessica to shift the doors:


       Fast bind, fast ﬁ nd—
       A  proverb never stale in thrifty mind.
           (2.5.54 f.)


But, for better and worse, she will not bind and he will not find. He  has no 
more luck in shutting out the world, in holding Jessica and his goods bound 
fast, than he will have in entrapping Antonio. She has not loved her father, 
as Cordelia loves Lear, “according to my bond”; she rejects, like Goneril and 
Regan, “the bond of childhood,” her family ties; yet Jessica’s recoil has been 
warranted by overriding considerations.

120
                       A  Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      111


       Portia’s gracious reception of Antonio is cut short by the farcical out-
burst between Nerissa and Gratiano. As the  young lawyer Balthazar, she 
has demanded Bassanio’s ring for her fee. Gratiano has been his emissary in 
reluctantly yielding it  up; and his corresponding transaction with  Nerissa, 
as the sham law clerk,  has been eﬀ ectuated behind the scenes. It is ﬁ t-
ting—and it builds up the humorous progression—that Portia should stand 
above the battle judiciously, until Gratiano’s self-defense exposes her mis-
placed conﬁ dence in Bassanio. His eﬀ ort to allay her mock-suspicion sets 
them oﬀ  on what might be called a blank-verse pas de deux. “Sweet Portia,” 
he pleads,


       If  you did know to whom I gave the ring,
       If  you did know for whom I  gave the ring,
       And  would conceive for what I gave the ring,
       And  how unwillingly I  left the ring,
       When  nought would be accepted but the ring,
       You would abate the strength of your displeasure.


Since she is actually the person to whom he gave the ring, she well knows 
for whom and for what it was given, and with what reluctance. It is he who is 
ironically unaware that she knows, that she was the civil doctor, and that she 
has the ring—whose erstwhile disappearance is deftly stressed by the ter-
minal syllables in a rising succession of conditional clauses. But she can also 
out-ring him,  epistrophe for epistrophe, as fluently as she has outmatched 
the spokesmen of masculine jurisprudence:


       If  you had known the virtue of the ring,
       Or  half her worthiness that gave the ring,
       Or  your own honor to contain the ring,
       You would not then have parted with the ring.
           (192–202)


Momentarily it seems as if Shakespeare were inviting the director to become 
a choreographer. The dancing is more formal in the finales of many other 
comedies, and the Elizabethan theater regularly featured song-and-dance 
afterpieces known as “jigs.” But I recall a eurythmic blocking of this passage 
where Portia turned her back and promenaded the stage, followed at several 
paces by Bassanio, each of them taking a single step per line and pausing 
at every repetition of ring.  At  a more psychological level, the gamesman-
ship resembles the last-act manoeuvres in The Marriage of Figaro, another 

121
112                                           Harry Levin


garden scene at night both in the comedy of Beaumarchais and the opera 
of Da Ponte and Mozart,  where the men are absurdly hoodwinked by the 
mistaken identities of the women.
       Gratiano  has operated as a zany to Bassanio, the jocular subaltern who 
goes through the same motions as his mentor with a parodic exaggeration. 
From the beginning he elected to “play the fool,” when Antonio declared his 
own part to be “a sad one” upon the world’s stage (1.1.79). Bassanio rebuked 
that “skipping spirit” for being “too wild, too rude, and bold of voice” (2.2.187, 
181). Gratiano’s conversational style, “an inﬁ nite deal of nothing,” bears a 
generic resemblance to that of Shakespeare’s other free-speakers: Mercutio, 
Berowne, Benedick, and in another key Hotspur (1.1.112). In Gratiano’s con-
tretemps with Nerissa, he parries her suspicions about the missing ring by 
describing its recipient—herself in her disguise—as “a little scrubbed boy” 
(5.1.162). Her tactic is to push the accusation, which no one could appreciate 
better than she, that this boy was a woman: “Th e clerk will ne’er wear hair 
on’s face that had it” (144). Portia’s equivocations to Bassanio go farther, and 
express a resolve to get even by a reciprocal adultery: “I’ll have that doctor for 
my bedfellow”—that doctor  being, in actuality, her virginal self (233). Nor 
does she deny herself anything in saying: “By heaven, I will ne’er come in 
your bed / Until  I see the ring” (190 f.). Such conjugal tests continually and 
increasingly bring home to us the awareness that these marriages have yet to 
be consummated, that bed lies ahead.
       It  is Antonio, Antonio  unbound, lone bachelor in the presence of three 
couples newly united by “love’s bonds,” who intervenes to halt the ﬂ irtatious 
charade (2.6.6). Typically, he characterizes himself as “th’unhappy subject of 
these quarrels” (5.1.237). It was he who opened the play on a note of sadness: 
“In  sooth I  know not  why I  am  so sad” (1.1.1). In linking  his  free-ﬂ oat-
ing anxiety with  the fortunes of  his ships at sea, Salerio and Solanio then 
painted an incidental picture of his mercantile position. Th at might well have 
served to diagnose a justiﬁ able premonition, but Antonio rejected the motive, 
as he did the suggestion of love. Conscious of his moody role, like Jaques, 
who would expatiate upon their simile of the theatrum mundi, he cultivates 
a special melancholy of his own. Among his cohort of friends, who warmly 
attest his moral and ﬁ scal worth, he reserves a unique aﬀ ection for Bassanio. 
“I think  he only  loves the world for him,” Solanio remarks (2.8.50). When 
Antonio philosophically accepts the unrelenting decree, he addresses his fare-
well to Bassanio, requesting him to tell his new wife about it,


       And  when the tale is told, bid her be the judge
       Whether  Bassanio had not once a love.
           (4.1.276 f.)

122
                        A Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      113


This is the point at which  Bassanio, seconded by Gratiano as usual, wishes 
that his wife  could be traded for Antonio’s life,  prompting dryly  appropri-
ate comments from Portia  and Nerissa and a caustic aside from  Shylock 
reflecting against his new son-in-law: “These are the Christian  husbands” 
(295). Portia—who is the judge right now—has beforehand, on the basis of 
Lorenzo’s report, accepted Antonio as “the bosom lover of my lord” (3.4.17). 
Modern readers have sometimes scented a homosexual relation. That sup-
position would not  explain why Bassanio courted Portia, or  why Antonio 
backed the courtship so generously. “Greater love hath no man than this . . .” 
But the mortal  sacrifice envisioned by the Gospel of Saint John altogether 
transcended sexuality. Though Antonio   is not  a  saint, he  seems to live 
vicariously, ready to die for the happiness of another. The Merchant of Venice 
does not strain the issue of love versus friendship, as do The Two Gentlemen 
of Verona and the Sonnets, though it may put some strain on our credulity.
       Yet if we suspend our disbelief in the vagaries of male impersonation, we 
ought not to balk too  much at milder improbabilities. Shakespeare had the 
convention of boy actors so well in hand that he liked to mock it, and Portia 
gayly seizes the chance to burlesque the other sex: “these bragging Jacks” 
(3.4.77). Helena, her opposite number in All’s Well Th at Ends Well, likewise 
scores a professional success, after disguising herself as a physician, and wins 
her errant husband’s ring through a less innocent wile than Portia’s, the bed-
trick. Th e loan of a ring was among the traditional devices for misunderstand-
ing in Th e Comedy of Errors. Jessica’s romance with Lorenzo is colored with 
touches of the carnivalesque. Since the actual wooing of Portia must be con-
ducted as a ceremonial, there has been little opportunity for open ﬂ irtation 
until this ﬁ nal episode. Portia has been more and more eﬀ ectually in charge, 
pulling all the strings like Rosalind in As You Like It. Nominally she may have 
deprecated herself as an unschooled girl and made Bassanio lord and master 
of her person and property with the gift of the ring. But—mistress of it once 
more—she makes a fool of him by her ﬁ fth-act joke, after having outwitted 
the males by her fourth-act verdict. Th ere should be no feminist capitulation 
for her, as there was for Katherina in Th e Taming of the Shrew.
       When  Antonio pleads with Portia, oﬀ ering “to be bound again” as secu-
rity for  his friend, she precipitates the denouement by producing the bone 
of contention (5.1.251). It  is she who  presides over the recognition scene, 
clearing up the  misunderstandings and handing out the  prizes. Antonio’s 
argosies have come safe to harbor after all, though how she obtained the 
good news will remain her secret forever. And, when Nerissa informs Jessica 
and Lorenzo of Shylock’s bequest, Lorenzo’s response is becomingly bibli-
cal: “Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way / Of  starving people” (294 f.). 
Th reats of cuckoldry are dissolved in jests, for Bassanio and Gratiano, with 

123
114                                           Harry Levin


the disclosure that their shadowy rivals have been their own wives incognito. 
Within  two  hours the night—such a night!—will   be over. To suggest that 
these lovers might just as well stay up through another day, and thus delay the 
consummation further, is no more than teasing. Conventionally, the happy 
endings of comedy have been formalized by revelry, by feasts or dances with a 
mating or betrothal in view: from the gamos of Aristophanes, with its phallic 
procession, to the tutelary blessing of the god Hymen for the four assorted 
couples in As You Like It. Here, since the weddings have already taken place, 
it is high time for the privacy of the bridal chamber.
       Th ere, between the postponed embraces, the spouses can complete their 
“inter’gatories,” mutually ﬁ lling in the details by reverting metaphorically to 
the cross-questioning of the courtroom (298). As they retire into  the villa, 
two by two, extinguishing the  candles in the garden, Antonio remains the 
lonely celibate, observably less at home in Belmont than in Venice. Like the 
melancholy Jaques—and not unlike the unpartnered Bunthorne in Patience—
he is the odd man  out, who must conclude: “I  am for other  than dancing 
measures.” Th e dialogue has waxed increasingly erotic, charging the air with 
double entendres, and the saltiest diction has been Gratiano’s. Under the mis-
apprehension that Nerissa may have regained the ring by dalliance with her 
alter ego, he has sworn to “mar the young clerk’s pen” (237). Revelation is 
metamorphosis; that boy—it transpires—was a girl, his girl; and his attitude 
shifts from aggressiveness to protectiveness. Yet he lapses, with his ultimate 
couplet, into another genital innuendo:


       Well, while I  live I’ll  fear no other thing
       So sore, as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring.
           (306 f.)


In this  context it might  not be improper to  remember the fabliau of Hans 
Carvel’s ring. That  became available in English through  the ribald  poem 
of Matthew  Prior, adapted from the Contes of La Fontaine; but it could be 
read during the Renaissance in versions by Rabelais, Ariosto, and others; 
and it is one of those facetious anecdotes that was bound to be passed along 
by word  of mouth.  Therein  an old  and cold  jeweller takes a young  and 
promiscuous wife. He is advised by the Devil how to curb her promiscuity: 
by permanently keeping his third finger  encircled within her. Gratiano,  to 
be sure, may imply that there are other and better  ways of accomplishing 
that purpose. Shakespeare’s own high-spirited wordplay loses no occasion 
for reminding  us that men are males, that women are females, and vive la 
différence! The last word is the key word that brings us back to the digital 
symbol of the conjugal  bond. The ring  itself,  the tie  that binds,  has also 

124
                       A  Garden in Belmont: The Merchant of Venice, 5.1      115


been proposed as a legal fee, in a milieu where ducats are worth their weight 
in daughters and where a pound of flesh could be the contractual consid-
eration for three thousand ducats. Thus, as Barbara Lewalski  has argued 
on other grounds, “The  ring episode is, in a sense, a comic parody of the 
trial scene.”
       In  concern over Portia’s and Nerissa’s rings, we have nearly forgotten 
Leah’s ring and what it signiﬁ ed to her husband if not  her daughter. Why 
have these revels been staged, if not to put Shylock out  of our  minds, to 
awaken us from the throes of a nightmare? Yet, with Shakespeare, the query 
always lingers: which is the reality, which the dream? Shylock the killjoy must 
be scoﬀ ed out of court; Shylock the spoilsport must be exorcised from the 
realm of comic euphoria. We ought not  to sentimentalize this  self-chosen 
scapegoat. Olivia can aﬀ ord a soft valediction for Malvolio in Twelfth Night: 
“He hath  been most notoriously abus’d.” But he must go, and go he does, 
impenitently and ineﬀ ectually vengeful: “I’ll be reveng’d on the whole pack 
of you.” We waste no grief on him—why so much grief over Shylock? “He 
doesn’t cast a shadow suﬃ  ciently strong,” in Edwin Booth’s opinion, “to con-
trast with  the sunshine of the  comedy.” Other actors, however, have tried 
to exalt him  into  a tragic hero. Erich  Auerbach would  situate him at  the 
borderline, an odd pariah originating in farce, voicing certain humanitarian 
ideas that have acquired a deeper resonance during later centuries, yet ﬁ nally 
capitulating as a “duped devil” (“geprellter Teufel”) before the “careless Olym-
pian serenity” (“achtlos olympische Heiterkeit”) of fairytale motifs and tender 
blandishments.
       “To  make him a tragic hero . . . ,” Auerbach has written, “clashes with 
the whole dramatic economy.” Others would contend that, through the ﬁ g-
ure of Shylock, such a clash is  built  into the  drama. Dr. Johnson praised 
“the union of two actions in one event.” So did Bertolt Brecht, though from 
quite another dramaturgical standpoint. Unity, which Brecht might not have 
emphasized, depends on Shylock’s total exclusion from act 5. He is not even 
named, except for Portia’s mention of “the rich Jew” and the reversion of his 
fortune “after his death” (292 f.). Yet, because the characterization has con-
veyed so powerful an impact, his shadow has continued to haunt the sunny 
purlieus of Belmont. In the French adaptation performed by the actor-direc-
tor Firmin  Gémier, Shylock chilled the honeymoon by making an untimely 
reappearance in Portia’s garden. To his conventional attributes—the hooked 
nose, the forked beard, the red curls, the jewelled ﬁ ngers, the pantaloon’s cap, 
the tribal gabardine—Gémier added a hangman’s noose. Th e intrusion was an 
unwarrantable distortion, but it all too heavily underlined a besetting Shake-
spearean point: that happiness, in one way or another, is seldom unconnected 
with suﬀ ering. Joy cannot be unconﬁ ned, when such joylessness can still be 

125
116                                           Harry Levin


humanly instigated. But to pursue that insight, as Barber suggested, would 
require an additional play.
       And  signiﬁ cantly, in spite of its carefully planned conclusion, this play 
has given rise to a train of sequels, most of them dedicated to the vindica-
tion of Shylock. A  sense of unﬁ nished business seems to have led the Irish 
playwright St. John Ervine to a disillusioning postlude, Th e Lady of Belmont, 
wherein—though Shylock makes a painless ﬁ nancial comeback—the wed-
ded lovers succumb to boredom or resort to  adultery ten years afterward. 
Maurice Schwartz, in Shylock and His Daughter, grounded upon a post-Nazi 
Hebrew novel, relocated characters within the ghetto of Venice and tried to 
work out an uneasy reconciliation. One of the objections to comedy, and to 
most ﬁ ction, is that real human beings can never count on living happily ever 
after. Since this truism is intimated by Th e Merchant of Venice, it looks beyond 
its genre. Some may perceive in it, with W. H. Auden, “as much a problem 
play as one by Ibsen or Shaw.” Such approaches, while sharpening its focus, 
have narrowed its range. Granted, the problems it raises for us were too easily, 
and factitiously, solved by the ideologies and conventions of Shakespeare’s 
day. His gift for humanizing and intensifying his subject matter projected it 
into an unforeseeable future, so that we can now look back at it and consider 
it timely. By  the same token, it is subject to continuing vicissitude, and no 
problem it broaches can expect a ﬁ nal solution.

126
                                        Tony        Tanner


  Which     Is   the   Merchant       Here?     And    Which      the   Jew?: 
     The   Venice    of  Shakespeare’s      Merchant          of   Venice





       see how yond justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark in thine ear: 
       change places, and handy-dandy, which is the justice, which is the thief? 
                                                                          (King Lear IV.vi.151–4)
When      Portia, disguised as Balthasar, “a young and learned doctor”, enters 

“ the Court of Justice in The Merchant of Venice, her first, business-like, question is 
 Which  is the merchant here? and which the Jew?” (IV.i.173) It is an astonish-
ing question. We know that Shylock would have been dressed in a “gaberdine”, 
because, we are told, antonio habitually spits on it. This was a long garment 
of hard cloth habitually worn by Jews who, since 1412, had been obliged to 
wear a distinctive robe extending down to the feet. Shylock would have been, 
literally, a ‘marked’ man (in a previous century he would have had to wear a 

“ yellow hat). antonio, a rich merchant who, we are again told, habitually comes 
 so smug upon the mart” (where ‘smug’ means sleek and well-groomed, as well 
as our sense of complacently self-satisfied), is more likely to have been dressed 
in some of the ‘silk’ in which he trades (look at the sumptuously dressed Vene-
tian merchants in Carpaccio’s paintings to get some idea). It would have been 
unmissably obvious which was the merchant and which was the Jew. So, is that 
opening question just disingenuousness on Portia/Balthasar’s part—or what?
       The first act is composed of three scenes set in the three (relatively) dis-
crete places, or areas, each of which has its distinct voices, values, and concerns. 


From Venetian Views, Venetian Blinds: English Fantasies of Venice, edited by Manfred Pfister 
and Barbara Schaff, pp. 45–62. Copyright © 1999 by editions rodopi B.V.


                                                       117

127
118                                                Tony Tanner


Together, they make  up the  world  of the  play. I will  call  these—Rialto  Venice; 
Belmont (Portia’s house, some indeterminate distance from Venice; probably best 
thought of  as being like one of those lovely Renaissance palaces still to be seen in 
the Veneto); and Ghetto Venice (Shylock’s realm: the word ‘ghetto’ never appears 
in the play, and, as John Gross has pointed out, Shakespeare makes no mention 
of it. But  the name Ghetto Nuovo (meaning New  Foundry)  was the name of the 
island in Venice on which the Jews were, eﬀ ectively, sequestered (and from which 
the generic use of ‘ghetto’ derives); and, clearly, Shylock lives in  a very diﬀ erent 
Venice from  the  Venice enjoyed by the  conﬁ dent Christian   merchants. Hence 
my metaphoric use of the name for what, in  Shakespeare, is simply designated as 
‘a public place’). Th e opening lines of the three scenes are, in sequence:


        In  sooth  I  know  not  why I  am so sad.
        It  wearies me,  you say it wearies  you . . .


        By  my troth,   Nerissa, my little   body  is aweary of  this great  world.


        Th ree thousand ducats—well.


Sadness and weariness on  the Rialto   and in  Belmont;   money  matters  in  the 
Ghetto.  Is  there  any inter-connection?   Can  anything   be done?
        Antonio    speaks ﬁ rst, which   is  quite  appropriate   since he is  the  ‘Mer-
chant’  of  the  title—not,   as  some think,   Shylock.  Had   Shakespeare wanted 
Shylock  signalled  in  his  title,   he could   well  have called  his  play  Th e Jew of 
Venice, in appropriate emulation   of Marlowe’s  Th e Jew of Malta (1589), which 
was playing  in London   in  1596  when  Shakespeare (almost certainly)   started 
his own  play,  and which   he (most  certainly)   knew  and,  indeed,  deliberately 
echoed at certain key  points (of  which,  more by and  by). But  Shylock  is a very 
diﬀ erent ﬁ gure from   Barabas, who  degenerates into  a grotesque  Machiavel-
lian monster.  In  fact, Shylock  only  appears in ﬁ ve of the  twenty  scenes of the 
play; though  he is, overwhelmingly,   the ﬁ gure who  leaves the deepest mark—
‘incision’ perhaps (see later)—on   the memory.  He  shuﬄ  es oﬀ , broken, beaten, 
and ill—sadder   and wearier  than  anyone  else in  Venice or  Belmont—at    the 
end of  Act  Four, never  to  return.  But, while   the triumph    and victory   belong 
unequivocally  to  Portia, it  is the  Jew’s play.
        However,  Antonio    is our  merchant,  and very  Hamlet-ish   he is, too.  He 
sounds an opening  note  of inexplicable  melancholy:


        But  how  I  caught  it, found  it,  or came by  it,
        What   stuﬀ  ‘tis made of, whereof it is born,  I am to  learn . . . (I,i,3–5)

128
                          The Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice      119


We might later have a guess at at least some of the ‘stuff ’ it is made of, but 
for now Salerio and Solanio (another of those effectively indistinguishable 
Rosencrantz-and-Guildenstern couples Shakespeare delights in—it offers 
another ‘which-is-which?’ puzzle in a lighter key), try to commiserate with 
him and cheer him up. And in their two speeches, Shakespeare—breathtak-
ingly—manages to convey a whole sense of mercantile Renaissance Venice. 
Of course, they say, you are understandably worried—“your mind is tossing 
on the ocean”—about your “argosies” (a very recent English word for large 
merchant ships, coming from the Venetian Adriatic  port  of  Ragusa—and 
also used in Marlowe’s play). Salerio, packing all the  pride and confident 
arrogance of imperial, incomparable Venice into his lines, imagines those 
ships as “rich burghers on the flood”,   or “pageants [magnificent floats in 
festival and carnival parades] of the sea”, which


       Do  overpeer the petty traﬃ  ckers
       Th at cursy [curtsy] to them, do them reverence,
       As they ﬂ y by them with their woven wings. (I,i,12–14)


Other sea-faring traders are “petty traffickers”: Venetian merchants, attract-
ing and exacting world-wide admiration and deference, are something quite 
superbly else. Solanio chimes in, evoking a merchant’s necessary anxieties 
about winds, maps, ports, piers, and everything that, he says, “might make 
me fear / Misfortune to my ventures”—‘ventures’ is a word to watch. Salerio 
develops the theme, imagining how everything he saw on land would some-
how remind him of shipwrecks:


       Should I  go to church
       And  see the holy ediﬁ ce of stone
       And  not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
       Which  touching but my gentle vessel’s side
       Would  scatter all her spices on the stream,
       Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks—
       And  in a word, but even now worth this,
       And  now worth nothing? (I,i,29–36)


“But  now a king,  now  thus”, says Salisbury when he watches King John 
die, pondering the awesome mortality of kings (King John V,vii,60). In this 
Venice, there is much the same feeling about the loss of one of their argosies, 
monarchs (or burghers—it was a republic) of the sea as they were. And what 
a sense of riches is compacted into the lines imagining spices scattered on 

129
120                                           Tony Tanner


the stream, and waves robed in silk—an image of spilt magnificence if ever 
there was one.
       It  is important to  note Salerio’s reference to “church . . . the holy ediﬁ ce 
of stone”. In one of those contrasts dear to artists, the stillness and ﬁ xity of the 
holy ediﬁ ce of stone is to be seen behind the ﬂ ying ships on the tossing oceans 
and ﬂ owing streams—the eternal values of the church conjoined with, and 
in some way legitimating, the worldly wealth-gathering of the sea-venturing, 
transient merchants; the spiritual ideals sustaining the material practices. For 
Venice was a holy city (the Crusades left from there), as well as the centre of a 
glorious worldly empire. It was an object of awe and fascination to the Elizabe-
thans. Indeed, as Philip Brockbank suggested, Venice was for Renaissance writ-
ers what Tyre was for the prophet Isaiah—“the crowning city, whose merchants 
are princes, whose traﬃ  ckers are the honourable of the earth” (Isaiah 23:8). But 
Tyre was also a “harlot” who made “sweet music”, and Isaiah prophesies that it 
“shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world” (Venice was also 
famed, or notorious, for its alleged sensualities—in Elizabethan London there 
was a brothel simply named ‘Venice’). But, also this about Tyre:


       And  her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord: 
       for  it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shall 
       be for them that  dwell before the Lord, to eat suﬃ  ciently, and for 
       durable clothing. (23:18)


Traditionally, religion  is ascetic and preaches a rejection of worldly goods. 
But here we see religion and the ‘use of riches’ creatively reconciled—and 
by spending, not hoarding. As Tyre,  so Venice. But there is, in  Isaiah, an 
apocalyptic warning—that God will  turn the whole city “upside down” and 
“scatter” the inhabitants—


       And  it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest . . . as with the 
       buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; 
       as with  the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him. Th e 
       land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath 
       spoken this word. (24:2,3)


Ruskin would say that that was effectively what did happen to Venice. But that 
is another story. The point for us here is that the Venetian setting of his play 
allowed Shakespeare to pursue his exploratory interest in (I quote Brockbank)


       the  relationship between the values of empire and those of  the 
       aspiring aﬀ ections, human and divine; those of the City of  Man 

130
                          The Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice      121


       and  those of  the  City  of  God   . . . between the values we are 
       encouraged to  cultivate in   a mercantile, moneyed and  martial 
       society, and those which are looked for in  Christian  community 
       and fellowship; between those who believe in the gospel teachings 
       of  poverty, humility and passivity, and those who (as the creative 
       hypocrisy requires) pretend to.


Returning to the play, Solanio says that if Antonio is not sad on account of 
his “merchandise”, then he must be in love. Antonio turns away the sugges-
tion with  a “Fie, fie!”.  As it  happens, I think this  is close to the mark, but 
we will  come to that. Here Solanio gives up on trying to  find  a reason for 
Antonio’s gloom—


       Th en let us say you are sad
       Because you are not merry; and ‘twere as easy
       For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry. (I,i,47–9)


And he leaves with Salerio, who says to Antonio—“I would have stayed till 
I had made you merry”. ‘Merry’ is a lovely word from old English, suggest-
ing pleasing, amusing, agreeable, full of lively enjoyment. “To be merry best 
becomes you,” says Don Pedro to the vivacious Beatrice “for out o’ ques-
tion, you were born in  a merry hour”  (Much Ado II,i,313–4)—and we feel 
he has chosen just the right word. The princely merchants of Venice favour 
the word, for, in  their aristocratic way, they believe in ‘merriment’. It is an 
unequivocally positive word; it has no dark side, and carries no shadow. Yet 
in this  play, Shakespeare makes it become ominous. When Shylock sug-
gests to Antonio that he pledges a pound of his flesh as surety for the three 
thousand ducat loan, he refers to it as a “merry bond”, signed in a spirit of 
“merry sport” (I,iii,170,142). The word has lost its innocence and is becom-
ing sinister. The last time  we hear it is from  Shylock’s daughter, Jessica in 
Belmont—“I  am never merry when I hear sweet music” (V,i,69). After her 
private duet with Lorenzo,  nobody speaks to Jessica in Belmont and these 
are, indeed, her last words in the play. It is hard to feel that she will be hap-
pily assimilated into the Belmont world. Something has happened to ‘merry-
ness’, and although Belmont is, distinctly, an abode of “sweet music”, a note 
of un-merry sadness lingers in the air.


                                                      *  *  *


When Bassanio enters with Gratiano, he says to the departing Salerio and 
Solanio, as if reproachfully, “You grow  exceeding strange; must it be so?” 

131
122                                           Tony Tanner


(I,i,67) It  is a word which recurs in a variety of contexts, and it reminds us 
that there is  ‘strangeness’ in Venice, centring on Shylock, whose “strange 
apparent cruelty” (IV,i,21) is some sort of reflection of, response to, the fact 
that he is treated like “a stranger cur” (I,iii,115) in Venice. And he is, by law, 
an alien in the city—the  stranger within. Gratiano  then has a go at Anto-
nio—“You look not  well, Signior Antonio”   (“I  am not well”, says Shylock, 
as he leaves the play—IV,i,395: now the merchant, now the Jew. Sickness 
circulates in Venice, along with all the other ‘trafficking’).


       You have too much respect upon the world;
       Th ey lose it that do buy it with much care.
       Believe me, you are marvelously changed. (I,i,74–6)


His scripture is a little awry here: what people lose who gain the whole world 
is the soul, not the world.  A mondain Venetian’s slip, perhaps. But we are 
more likely to be alerted by the phrase ‘marvelously changed’. Shakespear-
ian comedy is full of marvellous changes, and we may be considering what 
transformations, marvellous or otherwise, occur in this  play. In the event, 
the ‘changes’ turn out to be far from unambiguous ‘conversions’. Somewhere 
behind all  these conversions is the absolutely basic phenomenon whereby 
material  is  converted into  ‘merchandise’ which   is  then  converted into 
money—which, as Marx  said, can then convert, or  ‘transform’ just about 
anything into just about anything else. It is perhaps worth remembering that 
Marx praised Shakespeare, in particular, for showing that  money had the 
power of a god, while it behaved like a whore.
       Jessica willingly converts to Christianity, hoping for  salvation, at least 
from her father’s house, but it hardly seems to bring, or promise, any notable 
felicity or grace. Shylock is forced to convert to Christianity—which, how-
ever construed by the Christians (he would thereby be ‘saved’), is registered 
as a ﬁ nal humiliation and the stripping away of the last shred of his identity. 
When Portia gives herself to Bassanio, she says:


       Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours
       Is now converted. (III,ii,166–7)


and this is to be felt as a willing conversion, a positive transformation—just 
as she will, like a number of other heroines, ‘change’ herself into a man to 
effect some genuine salvation. Sad Antonio, it has to be said, is not much 
changed at all at the end—though his life has been saved, and his ships have 
come sailing in. Venice itself, as represented, is hardly changed; not, that is, 
renewed or redeemed—though it is a good deal more at ease with itself for 

132
                          The Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice      123


having got rid of Shylock. If that  is what it has done. One hardly feels that, 
as it were, the realm has been purged, and that the malcontent threatening 
the joy of the festive conclusion has been happily exorcised. The play does 
not really end quite so ‘well’ as that. It is not a ‘metamorphic’ celebration.
       It  is Bassanio’s plea for ﬁ nancial help from Antonio that concludes the 
ﬁ rst scene, and the way in which he does so is crucial to an appreciation of 
what follows. He  admits that he has “disabled mine estate” by showing “a 
more swelling port” than he could aﬀ ord. ‘Swelling port’ is ‘impressively lav-
ish life-style’, but I  think we will  remember the ‘portly sail’ of the Venetian 
argosies just referred to, also, no doubt, ‘swollen’ by the winds (cf the ‘big-
bellied sails’ in A Midsummer Night’s Dream). Th e Venetian princely way of 
life is both  pregnant and distended—fecund and excessive. As Bassanio is, 
however inadvertently, recognising by using a key word: he is worried about 
his ‘great debts’:


       Wherein  my time, something too prodigal,
       Hath  left me gaged. (I,ii,1490–50)


Shylock calls Antonio a “prodigal Christian”, and it was always a fine point 
to decide  to  what extent  ‘prodigality’  was compatible  with  Christianity 
(think of the parables of the Prodigal Son, and the Unjust Steward), and to 
what extent it contravened it. It is one of those words which look two ways, 
pointing in one direction to the magnanimous bounty of an Antony, and in 
the other to the  ruinous squandering of a Timon.  Clearly, the munificent 
prodigality  of Antonio   is in  every way preferable to the obsessive mean-
ness and parsimony of Shylock. But there is a crucial speech on this sub-
ject, tucked away, as was sometimes Shakespeare’s wont, where you might 
least expect it. Salerio and Gratiano are whiling away the time in  front  of 
Shylock’s house, waiting to help Lorenzo in the abduction of Jessica. Salerio 
is saying that lovers are much more eager to consummate the marriage than 
they are to remain faithful   (‘keep obliged faith’)  subsequently. “That ever 
holds” says Gratiano:


       All  things that are
       Are  with more spirit chased than enjoyed.
       How  like a younger or a prodigal
       Th e scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
       Hugged and embraced by the strumpet wind!
       How  like the prodigal doth she return,
       With   over-weathered ribs and ragged sails,
       Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind. (II,vi,12–19)

133
124                                           Tony Tanner


An apt enough extended metaphor in a mercantile society, and the Venetians 
must have seen many ship sail out ‘scarfed’ (decorated with flags and stream-
ers) and limp back ‘rent’. It may be added that Gratiano is something of  a 
cynical young blade. But the speech stands as a vivid reminder of one possible 
fate of ‘prodigality’, and of marriage. Ultimately of Venice too, perhaps.
       Bassanio, whatever else he is (scholar, courtier) is a ‘prodigal’, and he 
wants to  clear his ‘debts’. Antonio  immediately  says that “my  purse, my 
person” (a nice near pun, given the close inter-involvement of money and 
body in this  play) “lie  all unlocked to  your occasions” (I,i,139). Th is open 
liberality might  be remembered when we later hear the frantically retentive 
and self-protective Shylock (a name not found outside this play) repeatedly 
warning Jessica to “look to my house . . . lock up my doors . . . shut doors 
after you” (II,v,16,29,52). Th e diﬀ erence is clear enough, and need not be 
laboured. Antonio also positively invites  Bassanio to “make waste of all I 
have” (I,i,157)—insouciantly negligent aristocrats like to practise what Yeats 
called ‘the wasteful virtues’. Th e contrast with ‘thrifty’ Shylock, again, does not 
need underlining.
       But  Bassanio has another possible solution to his money problems; one 
which depends on ‘adventuring’ and ‘hazard’.


       In  Belmont is a lady richly left;
       And  she is fair and, fairer than that word,
       Of  wondrous virtues . . .
       Nor  is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
       For the four winds blow in from  every coast
       Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
       Hang  on her temples like a golden ﬂ eece,
       Which  makes her seat of Belmont Colchos’ strand,
       And  many Jasons come in quest of her.
       O  my Antonio, had I but the means
       To hold  a rival place with one of them,
       I  have a mind presages me such thrift
       Th at I should questionless be fortunate! (I,i,161–176)


Antonio, all  his wealth at sea, at the moment has neither “money, nor com-
modity”; but he will  use his “credit” to get “the means”. He will borrow the 
money from Shylock to finance Bassanio’s quest of a second golden fleece. 
So it is  that the seemingly discrete worlds of the  Ghetto, the  Rialto, and 
Belmont are, from the beginning, indeed, interinvolved.
       Venice, as we have seen it and will see it, is  overwhelmingly a man’s 
world of public life; it  is conservative, dominated by law, bound together by 

134
                          The Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice      125


contracts, underpinned by money—and closed. Belmont is run by women 
living the private life; it is liberal, animated by love, harmonised by music and 
poetry (‘fancy’), sustained by gold—and open. However cynical one wants to 
be, it will not do to see Belmont as “only Venice come into a windfall” (Ruth 
Nevo). It is better to see it as in a line of civilised, gracious retreats, stretch-
ing from  Horace’s Sabine farm, through Sidney’s Penshurst, Jane Austen’s 
Mansﬁ eld Park, up to Yeats’s Coole Park. As Brockbank said, such places 
ideally oﬀ ered “the prospect of a protected life reconciling plenitude, exuber-
ance, simplicity and order.” It was Sidney who said that “our world is brazen, 
the poets only deliver a golden”, and you might  see Belmont as a kind of 
‘golden’ world which has been ‘delivered’ from the ‘brazen’ world of trade and 
money. Yes, somewhere back along the line, it is all grounded in ducats; but 
you must think  of the churches, palaces, art works and monuments of the 
Renaissance, made possible by varying forms of patronage, and appreciate 
that the “courtiers, merchants and bankers of the Renaissance found ways of 
transmuting worldly goods into spiritual treasure” (Brockbank). Belmont is a 
privileged retreat from Venice; but, as Portia will show, it can also fruitfully 
engage with it.
       In   scene two, we are in Belmont,  and Portia  is weary. Partly surely, 
because she must be bored stiﬀ  with the suitors who have come hopefully 
buzzing round the honey-pot—the silent Englishman, the mean Scotsman, 
the vain Frenchman, the drunken German, and so on, as she and Nerissa 
amuse themselves discussing their diﬀ erent intolerabilities. But, more impor-
tantly, because she is under the heavy restraint of a  paternal interdiction 
(familiar enough in comedy, though this one comes from beyond the grave). 
She has been deprived of choice—and she wants a mate. Th en we learn from 
Nerissa about the lottery of  the casquets, which she thinks was the “good 
inspiration” of a “virtuous” and “holy” man. We shall see. But we note that, 
in this, Belmont (in  the form of Portia) is as much under the rule of (male) 
law as Venice. Th ere are “laws for the blood” in both places, and they may by 
no means be “leaped” or “skipped” over (I,ii,17ﬀ .). In other comedies, we see 
inﬂ exible, intractable, unmitigatable law magically, mysteriously melt away 
or be annulled. Not in this play. Here, the law is followed, or pushed, to the 
limit—and beyond. Indeed, you might say that Belmont has to come to Ven-
ice to help discover this ‘beyond’ of the law.
       And  now, in scene three, we are in Shylock’s Venice; and we hear, for the 
ﬁ rst time, what will become an unmistakable voice—addressing, as it were, 
the bottom  line in  Venice: “three thousand ducats—well”. Shylock speaks 
in—unforgettable—prose, and this marks something of a crucial departure 
for Shakespeare. Hitherto, he had reserved prose for, eﬀ ectively, exclusively 
comic (usually ‘low’) characters. With Shylock, this all changes. For Shylock 

135
126                                           Tony Tanner


is not a comic character. He has a power, a pain, a passion, a dignity—and, yes, 
a savagery, and a suﬀ ering—which, whatever they are, are not comic.
       On  his ﬁ rst appearance, Shylock establishes his ‘Jewishness’ by, among 
other things, revealing his adherence to Jewish dietary rules—“I will not eat 
with you, drink with  you, nor pray with you” (I,iii,34–5). But when Antonio 
appears, Shylock reveals a darker side of his nature in an ‘aside’:


       I  hate him for he is a Christian;
       But  more, for that in low simplicity
       He  lends out money gratis, and brings down
       Th e rate of usance here with us in Venice.
       . . .
       He  hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
       Even there where merchants most do congregate,
       On  me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
       Which  he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe
       If  I  forgive him. (I,iii,39–49)


Shylock gives three good reasons for his hating of Antonio—insofar as one 
can have good reasons for hatred: personal, professional, tribal. This is inter-
esting in view of his response during the trial scene, when he is asked why 
he would not prefer to have ducats rather than Antonio’s flesh:


       So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
       More  than a lodged hate and a certain loathing
       I  bear Antonio . . . (IV,i,59–61)


His opening exchange with Antonio really defines the central concern of the 
play, and is crucial. He has already mentioned ‘usance’ (‘a more cleanly name 
for usury’),  ‘thrift’   (which  means both  prosperity  and frugality—‘thrift, 
Horatio, thrift’),   and  ‘interest’. And  ‘usury’, of course, is the heart of  the 
matter. Any  edition of  the play will   tell you that  the law  against lending 
money at interest was lifted in 1571, and a rate of 10% was made legal. Queen 
Elizabeth depended on money borrowed at interest, so did most agriculture, 
industry, and foreign trade by the end of the sixteenth century (according to 
R. H.  Tawney). So, indeed, did Shakespeare’s own Globe Theatre. Plenty 
of Christians lent  money at interest (including  Shakespeare’s own father); 
and Bacon, writing  “Of  Usury”  in  1625, said “to speak of the  abolishing 
of usury is idle”. Antonio,  scattering his interest-free loans around Venice, 
is certainly an ‘idealised’ picture of the merchant, just as Shylock sharpen-
ing his  knife  to  claim his  debt, is  a ‘demonised’ one. But  Aristotle  and 

136
                            The  Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice               127


Christianity    had  spoken  against  usury,  and  there  was undoubtedly   a  good 
deal of residual  unease and ambivalence  about  it. Ruthless  usurers were  thus 
especially hated  and abused, and since  Jews were identified   as quintessential 
usurious money-lenders,   (and, of  course, had killed   Christ),   they  were avail-
able for  instant  and constant  execration.   This  must  certainly   be viewed  as a 
collective  hypocrisy—one   of those  ‘projections’  by which  society  tries to  deal 
with  a bad  conscience (not  that  Shakespeare would  have  seen many Jews in 
London;   it is  estimated  that  there  were less than  two  hundred   at the  time). 
Shakespeare was  not  addressing   a contemporary    problem;   rather,  he  was 
exploring   some of  the  ambivalences  and  hypocrises,  the  value  clashes and 
requisite  doublenesses, which  inhere  in,  and attend  upon,  all  commerce.
        Th e play  is full   of commercial   and  ﬁ nancial  terms: ‘moneys’,  ‘usances’, 
‘bargains’,  ‘credit’,  ‘excess’ and ‘advantage’  (both   used of  usury   and  proﬁ t), 
‘trust’,  ‘bond’  (which   occurs vastly  more  often  than  in  any  other  play:  curi-
ously ‘contract’  is not used—Shakespeare  wants  us to focus on  ‘bond’),  ‘com-
modity’  and  ‘thrift’.   Launcelot   Gobbo   is “an  unthrifty    knave”,  while  Jessica 
ﬂ ees from  her  father’s  house  with   “an  unthrift    love”.  Th is last  serves as  a 
reminder   that   both   here  and  elsewhere   in  Shakespeare  the   language  of 
ﬁ nance and usury  could   be used as a paradoxical   image  of  love (happiness 
accrues and passion  grows by  a form  of  natural  interest).  You  will  hear  it  in 
Belmont  as well  as on the Rialto.  When   Portia  gives herself to  Bassanio, she, 
as it were, breaks the  bank:


        I  would  he trebled  twenty  times  myself,
        A  thousand  times  more fair,  ten thousand  times  more  rich,
        Th at only  to stand  high  in  your account,
        I  might   in virtues,  beauties, livings,  friends,
        Exceed  account. (III,ii,    153–7)


Rich  place, Belmont;   generous lover,  Portia!
        Th e absolutely central  exchange occurs when  Antonio   and  Shylock  dis-
cuss ‘interest’, or ‘borrowing  upon advantage’. “I do never use it” declares Anto-
nio (what  is the relationship  between ‘use’ and ‘usury’? Another  consideration.) 
Shylock  replies, seemingly  rather  inconsequentially:  “When   Jacob grazed  his 
uncle Laban’s sheep. . . .” Antonio  brings  him  to the  point. “And   what of  him? 
Did  he take interest?” Shylock seems to prevaricate: “No, not take interest—not 
as you would  say /  Directly   int’rest”  and  then  recounts  the story  from   Gen-
esis. Th is tells how Jacob tricked—but is that  the right   word?—his  exploitative 
uncle, Laban:  they  agreed that,  for  his  hire,  Jacob should  be entitled   to  any 
lambs, in the ﬂ ocks he was tending, that were born “streaked and pied”. Follow-
ing the primitive   belief that  what a mother  sees during conception has an eﬀ ect 

137
128                                           Tony Tanner


on the oﬀ spring, Jacob stripped some “wands” (twigs or branches), so that some 
were light while others were dark, and “stuck them up before the fulsome ewes” 
as the rams were impregnating them. In the subsequent event, a large number 
of “parti-coloured lambs” were born, which of course went to Jacob. Nice work; 
but was it also sharp practice? Or was it both, and so much the better? Or, does 
it matter? Not as far as Shylock is concerned:


       Th is was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
       And  thrift  is blessing if men steal it not. (I,iii,86f.)


‘Ewes’ may be a pun on ‘use’; and for Shylock, it is as legitimate to use ewes 
in the field as it is to use usury on the ‘mart’. Not so for Antonio:


       Th is was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for,
       A  thing not in  his power to bring to pass,
       But  swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven.
       Was this inserted to make interest good?
       Or  is your gold and silver ewes and lambs? (88–92)


And Shylock:


       I  cannot tell; I make it breed as fast. (88–93)


Antonio’s last line  effectively poses the question of the play. It was a line 
often quoted, (or  more often,  slightly  misquoted), by Ezra  Pound in  his 
increasingly unbalanced vituperations against usury  and Jews. The  root 
feeling behind it is that it  is somehow unnatural for inorganic matter (gold, 
silver, money) to reproduce itself in a way at least analogous to the natural 
reproductions in the organic realm (“they say it is against nature for Money 
to beget Money”, says Bacon, quoting Aristotle). This  enables Antonio to 
reject Shylock’s self-justifying analogy: Jacob’s story does not “make interest 
good”, because he was having, or making, a “venture”, and the result was, 
inevitably, “swayed and fashioned” by—heaven? nature? some power not his 
own. This, revealingly, was how Christian commentators of the time justi-
fied Jacob’s slightly devious behaviour (as Frank Kermode pointed out)—he 
was making a venture. Antonio’s ships are ‘ventures’, and Bassanio is on a 
venture when he ‘adventures forth’ to Belmont. It  seems that the element 
of ‘risk’ (= to run  into danger) and ‘hazard’ purifies or justifies  the act. As 
‘hazard’ was originally an Arabian word for a gaming die, this would seem 
to enable gambling to pass moral muster as well. Perhaps it does. Whatever, 
there is seemingly no risk, as well as no nature, in usury. Shylock’s answer, 

138
                          The Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice      129


that he makes his money “breed as fast”, is thought to  tell  totally against 
him; and Bassanio’s subsequent remark, “for when did friendship take / A 
breed for barren metal of  his friend?”  (I,iii,130–1),  is taken to  orient our 
sympathies, and values, correctly. But this won’t quite do.
       Because, like it or  not, money most certainly does ‘breed’. It may not 
literally copulate, but there is no way round the metaphor. Sigurd Burckhardt 
is the only commentator I have read who has seen this clearly, and he wrote: 
“metal [‘converted’ into money] is not barren, it does breed, is pregnant with 
consequences, and capable of transformation into life and art”. For a start, it 
gets Bassanio to Belmont, and the obtaining of Portia and the Golden Fleece 
(or Portia as a golden ﬂ eece). And, as if to signal his awareness of the proxim-
ity, even similitude, of the two types of ‘breeding’, with the lightest of touches: 
when Gratiano announces he is to marry Nerissa at the same time as Bassa-
nio marries Portia, Shakespeare has him add—“We’ll play with them the ﬁ rst 
boy for a thousand ducats” (III,ii,214). You ‘play’ for babies, and you ‘play’ for 
ducats. Which also means that when Shylock runs through the streets crying 
“O my ducats! O my  daughter!” (echoing Marlowe’s Barabas who cries out 
“oh, my girl, my gold”, but when his daughter restores his wealth to him), we 
should not be quite so quick to mock him as the little Venetian urchins. He 
may not use his money to such life-enhancing and generous ends as some of 
the more princely Venetians; but he has been doubly bereaved (which literally 
means—robbed, reaved, on all sides, be-).
       Having  mentioned that  robbery, I will just  make one point about the 
Jessica and Lorenzo sub-plot. However sorry we may feel for Jessica, liv-
ing in  a ‘hell’ of  a house with her  father; the behaviour of  the two  lovers 
is only to be deprecated. Burckhardt is absolutely right again: “their love is 
lawless, ﬁ nanced by theft and engineered by a gross breach of trust”. Jessica 
“gilds” herself with ducats, and throws a casket of her father’s wealth down 
to Lorenzo (“Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains” II,vi,33—another 
echo-with-a-diﬀ erence of Marlowe’s play, in which Abigail throws down her 
father’s wealth from a window, to her father). Th is is an anticipatory parody, 
travesty rather, of Portia, the Golden (not ‘gilded’) Fleece, waiting to see if 
Bassanio will pass the test of her father’s caskets (containing wisdom, rather 
than simple ducats). He ‘hazards’ all; this couple risk nothing. Th ey squan-
der eighty ducats in a night—folly,  not  bounty. Jessica exchanges the ring 
her mother gave her father as a love-pledge, for—a monkey! Th ey really do 
make a monkey out of marriage—I will  come to their famous love duet in 
due course. Th eir’s is the reverse, or inverse, of a true love match. It must be 
intended to contrast with  the marriage made by Bassanio and Portia. Th is 
marriage also, admittedly, involves wealth—as it does paternal caskets; but, 
and the diﬀ erence is vital, wealth not gained or used in the same way.

139
130                                                Tony Tanner


        Th ose caskets! Shakespeare took nearly everything that  he wanted for  his 
plot  (including   settings, characters, even  the ring   business in  Act  V)  from   a 
tale in  Il  Pecorone (Th e Dunce), a collection of stories  assembled by Giovanni 
Fiorentino,  published  in Italy   in 1558—everything   except  the trial  of  the cas-
kets. In  the Italian   story, to  win  the  lady, the hero  has to  demonstrate  to  her 
certain powers of sexual performance and endurance. Clearly, this was not  quite 
the thing   for a Shakespearean heroine. So  Shakespeare took the  trial-by-cas-
kets from  a tale  in the  thirteenth-century    Gesta Romanorum, which  had been 
translated  into  English.  Here,  a  young  woman  has to  choose between  three 
vessels—gold, silver, lead—to  discover  whether  she is  worthy   to  be the  wife 
of the  Emperor’s son. All   we need note about  it  is one signiﬁ cant change that 
Shakespeare made in the inscriptions  on  the vessels/caskets. Th ose on the gold 
and silver ones are eﬀ ectively the same in each case—roughly, “Who   chooseth 
me shall gain/get  what he  desires/deserves”. But in the mediaeval  tale, the lead 
casket bears the inscription  “Th ei that chese me, shulle fynde [in] me that God hath 
disposid  ”. Now, since the young woman  is a good  Christian,  she could  hardly 
have been told more clearly  that this  was the one to go for. It  is, we may say, no 
test at all. Shakespeare changes the inscription to “Who   chooseth me must give 
and hazard all he hath” (II,vii,9).   Th is is a very diﬀ erent matter. Instead of being 
promised a placid  and predictable  demonstration   of  piety rewarded,  we are in 
that dangerous world  of risk  and hazard which, at various levels, constitutes the 
mercantile world  of  the play. And to  the prevailing  lexicon of  ‘get’ and ‘gain’ has 
been added the even more important   word—‘give’.  One  of the concerns of  the 
play is the conjoining  of giving  and gaining in  the most appropriate  way, so that 
they may ‘f rutify’  together (if  I  may borrow  Launcelot   Gobbo’s inspired  mala-
propism). “I  come by note,  to give and to receive”, Bassanio announces to Portia 
(III,ii,140—my    italics).  Which  is no  less than honesty.
        While    she is anxiously  waiting   as Bassanio inspects  the caskets, Portia 
says:


        Now   he goes,
        With    no less presence, but with  much  more  love,
        Th an young Alcides   [Hercules],  when  he did  redeem
        Th e virgin  tribute  paid  by howling   Troy
        To  the  sea monster. I stand  for sacriﬁ ce;
        Th e rest aloof  are the Dardanian   wives,
        With    bleared visages come forth  to  view
        Th e issue of th’ exploit.  Go,  Hercules!  (III,ii,53–60)


The  “virgin   tribute”  was Hesione,  and  her rescue by Hercules  is described  in 
Book  XI  of  Ovid’s  Metamorphoses (where it is preceded by stories concerning 

140
                          The Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice      131


Orpheus, who turned everything to  music, and Midas, who turned  every-
thing to gold—they are both referred to in the play, and are hovering mythic 
presences behind it). Portia’s arresting claim—“I stand for sacrifice”—reso-
nates through the play; to be darkly echoed by Shylock in court—“I stand for 
judgment . . . I stand here for law” (IV,i,103,142). When she says “stand for”, 
does she mean ‘represent’, or ‘embody’; or does she imply that she is in danger 
of being ‘sacrificed’ to the law of her father, unless rescued by right-choosing 
Hercules-Bassanio? Or is it just that women are always, in effect, ‘sacrificed’ 
to men in marriage, hence the “bleared visages” of those “Dardanian wives”? 
Something of all  of these, perhaps. In the  event, it is  Portia herself who, 
effectively rescues, or—her word—‘redeems’, not Troy, but Venice. Bassanio 
(courtier, scholar, and fortune-seeker) is, as we have seen, if not more, then as 
much Jason as Hercules. The point is, I think, that he has to be both as cun-
ning as the one and as bold as the other. The ‘both-ness’ is important.
       Th is is how Bassanio thinks his way to the choice of the correct casket:


       So may the outward shows be least themselves;
       Th e world is still deceived with ornament.
       In  law, what pleas so tainted and corrupt,
       But  being seasoned with a gracious voice,
       Obscures the show of evil? (III,ii,73–7)


This, mutatis mutandis, is a theme in Shakespeare from first to last—“all that 
glitters is not gold”, and so on (II,vii,65).  Bassanio is on very sure grounds 
in rejecting the gold and silver and opting for  lead, in the context of the test. 
But—‘ornament’: from ornare—to equip, to adorn. Now, if ever there was an 
equipped and adorned city, it was Venice. It is aware of dangerous seas and 
treacherous shores, of course; but it is also a city of beauteous scarves, and 
silks and species—and what are they but ‘ornaments’ for the body and for 
food? Bassanio is an inhabitant and creation of an ornamented world, and is 
himself, as we say, an ‘ornament’ to it. So why does he win by going through 
a show of rejecting it? He wins, because he realises that he has to subscribe 
to the unadorned modesty of lead, even while going for the ravishing glory 
of gold.  That was the  sort of  complex intelligence Portia’s father  had in 
mind for his daughter. Is it hypocrisy? Then we must follow Brockbank and 
call it “creative hypocrisy”. It recognises the compromising, and willing-to-
compromise, doubleness of values on which a worldly society (a society in 
the world) necessarily rests, and by which it is sustained. The leaden virtues, 
and the golden pleasures. Bothness.
       Such is the reconciling potency of Belmont; and Portia seals the happy 
marriage with  a ring. But,  meanwhile, Shylock is waiting  back in  Venice 

141
132                                           Tony Tanner


for his pound of  ﬂ esh, and he must be satisﬁ ed. Must—because he has the 
law on his side, and Venice lives by law; its wealth and reputation depend 
on honouring contracts and bonds—as Shylock is the ﬁ rst to point out: “If 
you deny [my bond],  let danger light  /  Upon your charter and your  city’s 
freedom”. Portia, as lawyer Balthasar, agrees: “Th ere is no power in Venice / 
Can alter a decree established” (IV,i,38–9,220–1). “I stay here on my bond” 
(IV,i,241)—if  he says the word ‘bond’ once, he says it a dozen times (it occurs 
over thirty times in this play—never more than six times in other plays). We 
are in a world of law where ‘bonds’ are absolutely binding. Portia’s beautiful 
speech exhorting to ‘mercy’ is justly famous; but, as Burckhardt remarked, 
it is impotent  and useless in this ‘court of justice’, a realm which  is under 
the rule of the unalterable letter of the law. Her sweet and humane lyricism 
founders against harsh legal literalism. Th e tedious, tolling reiteration of the 
word ‘bond’ has an eﬀ ect which musicians know  as ‘devaluation through 
repetition’. Th e word becomes emptier and emptier of meaning, though still 
having its deadening eﬀ ect. It is as if they are all in the grip of a mindless 
mechanism, which brings them to a helpless, dumb, impasse; with Shylock’s 
dagger quite legally poised to strike. Shylock, it is said, is adhering to the old 
Hebraic notion of the law—an eye for an eye. He has not been inﬂ uenced by 
the Christian saying of St Paul: “Th e letter killeth but the spirit giveth life.” 
For Shylock, the spirit  is the letter; and Antonio  can only be saved by the 
letter. It is as though Portia will  have to ﬁ nd resources in literalism which 
the law didn’t know it had.
       And  so, the famous moment of reversal:


       Tarry a little;  there is something else.
       Th e bond doth give thee here no jot of blood;
       Th e words expressly are “a pound of ﬂ esh.”
       Take then thy bond . . .
       Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
       But  just a pound of ﬂ esh. (IV,i,304–7, 324–5; my italics)


Ex-press: to press out. Portia squeezes new life and salvation out of the dead 
and deadly law—and not by extenuation or circumvention or equivocation. 
“How  every fool can play  upon the word!”,  says Lorenzo, in  response to 
Launcelot’s quibbles. But you can’t ‘play’ your way out of the Venetian law 
courts. Any solution must be found within   the precincts of stern, rigorous 
law. “The Jew shall have all justice . . . He shall have merely justice and his 
bond”. (IV,i,320,338) And,  to Shylock: “Thou shalt have justice more than 
thou desir’st”. (315) Portia makes literalism yield a life-saving further reach. 
Tr uly, the beyond of law.

142
                            The  Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice               133


        Life-saving   for  Antonio—and    for  Venice  itself, we  may say. But  not, of 
course, for Shylock. He simply  crumples; broken  by his own bond,  destroyed by 
the law  he “craved”. But  prior  to  this, his  speeches have an undeniable power, 
and a strangely  compelling  sincerity. Necessarily  un-aristocratic,  and  closer to 
the streets (and the ghetto life  back there somewhere), his speech in general has 
a force, and at times a passionate directness, which makes the more ‘ornamented’ 
speech of some of the more  genteel Christians  sound  positively eﬀ ete. Th ough 
his defeat is  both  necessary and gratifying—the   cruel  hunter  caught  with  his 
own device—there  is something terrible  in  the spectacle of his breaking. “I pray 
you give me leave to go from hence. I am not well” (IV,i,394–5).   And  Gratiano’s 
cruel, jeering ridicule,  with  which  he  taunts and lacerates Shylock  through  the 
successive blows of his defeat, does Christianity, does humanity,  no credit. Like 
the malcontent   or kill-joy    in  any comedy, Shylock  has to  be extruded  by  the 
regrouping, revitalised community,  and he is duly chastised, humiliated, stripped, 
and despatched—presumably  back to  the Ghetto.  He  is  never seen again; but 
it is possible to feel him  as a dark, suﬀ ering absence throughout the ﬁ nal Act in 
Belmont. And  in  fact, he does make one last, indirect ‘appearance’. When Portia 
brings the  news that  Shylock  has been forced to  leave all his wealth  to  Jessica 
and Lorenzo,  the  response is—“Fair  ladies, you  drop  manna  in the  way  / Of 
starved people” (V,i,293–4).  ‘Manna’  was, of course, what fell from   heaven and 
fed the  children  of Israel  in  the wilderness. Th is is the  only  time  Shakespeare 
uses the word; and, just for a second, its deployment  here—at  the height  of the 
joy in Christian   Belmont—reminds   us of the  long archaic biblical  past stretch-
ing back behind  Shylock—who   also, just for a second, brieﬂ y ﬁ gures, no matter 
how unwillingly,   as a version of the Old  Testament  God, providing   miraculous 
sustenance for his ‘children’ (a point made by John  Gross).
        But  why  did  not  Shakespeare end  his play  with   the climactic   defeat of 
Shylock—why   a whole   extra Act   with  that   ring  business? Had  he  done so, 
it would  have  left Venice  unequivocally   triumphant,   which  perhaps  he didn’t 
quite want.  Th is is the last aspect of the  play I  wish  to address, and I  must do 
so somewhat circuitously.  Perhaps  Shylock’s most  memorable  claim  is:


        I  am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, 
        dimensions, senses, aﬀ ections, passion?—fed with the same food, 
        hurt  with  the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by 
        the  same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer 
        as a Christian  is? If you prick  us, do we not bleed? (III,i,55–61)


That  last  question,   seemingly  rhetorical   (of  course  you do),  but  eventually 
crucial  (Shylock  seems to have overlooked  the fact  that  if he  pricks  Antonio, 
he will  bleed  too),  is  prepared  for,  in  an admittedly    small  way, by  the  first 

143
134                                           Tony Tanner


suitor to attempt the challenge of the caskets. The Prince of Morocco starts 
by defending the “shadowed livery” of his “complexion”, as against “the fair-
est creature northward born”:


       And  let us make incision for your love
       To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. (II,i,6–7)


So, a black and a Jew claiming an equality with white Venetian gentle/gentiles 
(another word exposed to examination in the course of the play), which I have 
not the slightest doubt Shakespeare fully accorded them (the princely Morocco, 
in fact, comes off rather better than the silvery French aristocrat who follows 
him). And  Morocco’s hypothetical ‘incision’ anticipates the literal  incision 
which Shylock seeks to make in Antonio. When Bassanio realises that Portia 
is going to ask to see her ring, which he has given away, he says in an aside:


       Why, I  were best cut my left hand oﬀ 
       And  swear I lost the ring defending it. (V,i,177–8)


So, there may be ‘incisions’ made ‘for love’, from hate, and out of guilt. Por-
tia describes the wedding ring as


       A  thing stuck on with oaths upon your ﬁ nger,
       And  so riveted with faith unto your ﬂ esh. (V,i,168–9)


‘Rivetting  on’  is, I   suppose, the opposite of  Shylock’s intended  cutting 
out; but, taken together, there is a recurrent linking   of law  (oaths, bonds, 
rings)—and flesh.  The  play could  be said to  hinge on  two  contracts or 
bonds, in which, or by which, the law envisions, permits, requires, ordains, 
the exposing of a part of the  body of one party to  the legitimate penetra-
tion (incision) by the other party  to the bond. If  that  party is Shylock, the 
penetration/incision would be done out of hate—and would  prove fatal; if 
that other party is Bassanio it should be done out of love—and give new life. 
Shylock swears by his ‘bond’; Portia works through her ‘ring’.
       It  should be noted that,  in the  last Act, when Bassanio is caught out 
with  having given Portia’s ring away to Balthasar, he stands before Portia 
as guilty and helpless as Antonio stood before Shylock. And, like Shylock, 
she insists on the letter of the  pledge, and will hear no excuses and is not 
interested in mercy. Like Shylock too, she promises her own form of ‘ﬂ eshly’ 
punishment (absence from Bassanio’s bed, and promiscuous inﬁ delity with 
others). As with the word ‘bond’ in the court scene, so with the word ‘ring’ in 
this last scene. It occurs twenty-one times, and at times is repeated so often 

144
                          The Venice of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice      135


that it risks suﬀ ering the semantic depletion which seemed to numb ‘bond’ 
into emptiness. Both the word ‘bond’ and the word ‘ring’—and all they repre-
sent in terms of binding/bonding—are endangered in this play. But the law 
stands—and continues to stand; bonds must be honoured or society collapses: 
there is nothing Bassanio can do. Th en, just as Portia-as-Balthasar found a 
way through the  Venetian impasse, so Portia-as-Portia has the life-giving 
power to enable Bassanio to renew his bond—she gives him, mysteriously 
and to him inexplicably, the same ring, for a second time. (She has mysterious, 
inexplicable good news for Antonio, too, about the sudden safe arrival of his 
ships.) A touch of woman’s magic. For Portia is one of what Brockbank called 
Shakespeare’s “creative manipulators” (of whom Prospero is the last). Like 
Vincentio (in Measure for Measure), she uses “craft against vice”. She can be a 
skilful man in Venice (a veritable Jacob), and a tricky, resourceful, ultimately 
loving and healing woman in  Belmont (a good Medea with  something of 
the art of Orpheus—both  ﬁ gures invoked in the scene). She can gracefully 
operate in, and move between, both worlds. Because she is, as it were, a man-
woman, as good a lawyer as she is a wife—more ‘both-ness’; she ﬁ gures a way 
in which  law and love, law and blood, need not be mutually exclusive and 
opposed forces. She shows how they, too, can ‘f rutify’ together.
       Th e person who both persuades Bassanio to give away his ring, and inter-
cedes for him with Portia (“I dare be bound again”) is Antonio. He is solitary 
and sad at the beginning, and is left alone at the end. He expresses his love for 
Bassanio in an extravagant, at times tearful way. It is a love which seems to be 
reciprocated. In the court scene, Bassanio protests to Antonio that


       life  itself, my wife, and all the world
       Are  not with me esteemed above thy life.
       I  would lose all, ay sacriﬁ ce them all
       Here to  this devil to deliver you.


Portia, (she certainly does “stand for sacrifice”!), permits herself an under-
standably dry comment:


       Your wife would give you little thanks for that
       If  she were by to hear you make the oﬀ er. (IV,i,283–8)


Perhaps this is why she decides to put Bassanio to the test with the ring. I 
do, of course, recognise the honourable tradition of strong male friendship, 
operative at the time.  I  also know that  ‘homosexuality’, as such, was not 
invented until the late nineteenth century. I am also totally disinclined to seek 
out imagined sexualities which are nothing to the point. But Antonio  is so 

145
136                                           Tony Tanner


moistly, mooningly in love with  Bassanio (and so conspicuously uninvolved 
with, and unattracted to, any woman), that I think that his nameless sadness, 
and seemingly foredoomed solitariness, may fairly be attributed to a homo-
sexual passion, which must now be frustrated since Bassanio is set on mar-
riage. (Antonio’s message to Bassanio’s wife is: “bid her be judge / Whether 
Bassanio had not once a love”, which implies ‘lover’ as much as ‘friend’; reveal-
ingly, Antonio’s one remaining desire is that Bassanio should witness the fatal 
sacrifice he is to make for him.) Even then, we might say that that is neither 
here nor there. Except for one fact. Buggery and usury were very closely asso-
ciated or connected in the contemporary mind as unnatural acts. Shylock is 
undoubtedly a usurer, who becomes unwell; but if Antonio is, not to put too 
fine a point on it, a buggerer, who is also unwell, well. . . .
       Perhaps some will ﬁ nd the suggestion oﬀ ensively irrelevant; and per-
haps it is. But the  atmosphere in Venice-Belmont, is not unalloyedly pure. 
Th e famous love duet between Lorenzo and Jessica which starts Act Five, 
inaugurating the happy post-Shylock era—“In such a night . . .”—is hardly 
an auspicious one, invoking as it  does a faithless woman (Cressida), one 
who committed suicide (Th isbe), an abandoned woman (Dido), and a sor-
ceress (Medea whose spells involved physical mutilation), before moving on 
to a contemporary female thief—Jessica herself. I hardly think that she and 
Lorenzo will bear any mythological ‘ornamenting’. And that theft has become 
part of the texture of the Belmont world. It is a place of beautiful music and 
poetry—and love; but with perhaps just a residual something-not-quite-right 
lingering from  the transactions and ‘usages’ of Ghetto-Rialto Venice. (Th e 
very last word of the play is a punningly obscene use of ‘ring’ by Gratiano, the 
most scabrous and cynical voice in Venice—again, a slightly oﬀ -key note.) 
Th ere is moonlight and candle-light for the nocturnal conclusion of the play, 
but it  doesn’t ‘glimmer’ as beautifully as it did at the end of  A Midsummer 
Night’s Dream. Portia says:


       Th is night methinks is but the daylight sick;
       It  looks a little paler. ‘Tis a day
       Such as the day when the sun is hid. (V,i,124–6)


A  little  of  the  circulating  sickness has reached Belmont. The  play  is a 
comedy; but Shakespeare has here touched on deeper and more potentially 
complex and troubling matters than he had hitherto explored, and the result 
is a comedy with a difference. And, of  course, it is primarily  Shylock who 
makes that difference.
       Now, let’s go back to the beginning. “Which is the merchant here? And 
which the Jew?” It turns out to be a good question.

146
                                The  Venice  of Shakespeare’s Merchant  of Venice                        137


                                                       Bibliography

Brockbank, Philip.   “Shakespeare and the Fashion of These Times”.  Shakespeare Survey 16 
         (1963).
Burckhardt, Sigurd. “The  Merchant of  Venice: The Gentle Bond”. Journal of English Literary 
         History 29 (1962).
Gross, John. Shylock. Four Hundred Years in the Life of a Legend. London, 1992.
Kermode, Frank.  “The  Mature  Comedies”. In:  Brown,  J.R./B.  Harris  (eds.): Early Shake-
         speare. Stratford-upon-Avon Studies, 3. London, 1961.
Nevo, Ruth. Comic Transformations in Shakespeare. London, 1980.
Tawney, R. H. Religion and the Rise of Capitalism. London, 1926.

148
                                         W.    H.    AuDEn


                              The    Merchant         of   Venice







With       memories of the horrors of the last ten years and forebodings about 
anti-Semitism, it is difficult  to look objectively at a play in which the villain 
is a Jew. But we must, in order to understand it. In England in Shakespeare’s 
day, English writers didn’t know Jews, who had been expelled by Edward I 
in 1290 and not readmitted until the time  of Cromwell. A  few years before 
the play was written,   there had been a law  case in which  Dr.  Roderigo 
Lopez,  a Portuguese Jew who  was  physician to  the  Queen,  was tried 
and executed for treason—it was a frame-up. Whatever prejudice against 
the Jews existed among Elizabethans, it was not  racial. Lorenzo  marries 
Shylock’s daughter—there is no thought of racial discrimination. The only 
racial remark in the play is made by Shylock, and the Christians  refute it. 
Religious differences in the play are treated frivolously: the question is not 
one of belief, but of conformity. The  important thing  about Shylock is not 
that he is a Jew or a heretic, but that he is an outsider.
       The Merchant of Venice is about a certain kind of society, a society that is 
related to and can’t do without someone whom it can’t accept. The Gentile 
Venetian society is a newborn bourgeois capitalist society, no longer feudal, 
not yet industrial. Feudal society is based on status by birth. In such a society, 
marriage must be arranged between the right people. But in The Merchant of 
Venice the issue is breeding, not inheritance. Jessica makes clear that though 


From Lectures on Shakespeare, reconstructed and edited by Arthur Kirsch, pp. 75–85, 372–73. 
Copyright © 2000 by Arthur Kirsch for the notes and © 2000 by the Estate of W. H. Auden 
for lectures and writings by Auden.

                                                       139

149
140                                          W. H. Auden


she is “a daughter” to Shylock’s “blood, / I am not to his manners” (II.iii.18–
19), and Lorenzo shows his lack of prejudice in perceiving this and marrying 
her. Portia, too, has no racial prejudice. She explains to the Moor that were 
she not bound by the test of the caskets,


       Yourself, renowned Prince, then stood as fair
       As any comer I have look’d on yet
       For my aﬀ ection.
           (II.i.19–21)


There is also no sense of a stratified class structure in the play: Gratiano, 
who marries  Nerissa, Portia’s maid,  is  treated as an  equal by Bassanio 
and Antonio,  and Nerissa is treated in  the same way by Portia. There  is 
a free choice in personal relationships.  Even the choice of  caskets is not 
an arrangement to provide a particular  person for Portia,  but a device to 
insure her marrying a person with a particular kind  of character, someone 
capable of making her  happy. The first   four suitors  announce that even 
if  they  win  Portia  by choosing  the  right  casket, they  won’t  insist that 
she marry them  unless she is willing.  This  is not  feudal. Feudal  society 
has fixed obligations.  In  this play  personal obligations are unlimited,   as 
Antonio’s conduct to  Bassanio shows. Antonio tells Bassanio, when he is 
asked for help,


       You know me well, and herein spend but time
       To wind  about my love with circumstance;
       And  out of doubt you do me now more wrong
       In  making question of my uttermost
       Th an if you had made waste of all I have.
       Th en do but say to me what I should do
       Th at in your knowledge may by me be done,
       And  I am prest unto it.
           (I.i.153–60)


Bassanio displays the same limitless generosity when he rushes to Antonio 
without first  lying  with Portia,  whom he has just won and married. Today 
there are no personal obligations in a laissez-faire society. In The Merchant 
of Venice you are free to form the personal relationships you choose, but your 
obligations are then enormous. There are few plays of Shakespeare in which 
the word “love”  is used more frequently, and the understanding of love is 
not unlike E. M.  Forster’s in his essay “I Believe,” in which he says, “if i had 

150
                                           The Merchant of Venice                              141


to choose between betraying my country and betraying my friend, I hope I 
should have the guts to betray my country.”
       Th ere is an aesthetic awareness in all the characters in this play. Lorenzo 
shows it when he describes the moonlight to Jessica:


       How  sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
       Here will  we sit and let the sounds of music
       Creep in our ears. Soft stillness and the night
       Become the touches of sweet harmony.
       Sit, Jessica. Look how the ﬂ oor of heaven
       Is thick  inlaid with  patens of bright gold.
           (V.i.54–59)


Lorenzo also says that


       Th e man that hath no music in himself,
       Nor  is not mov’d with concord of sweet sounds,
       Is ﬁ t for treason, stratagems, and spoils;
       Th e motions of his spirit are dull as night,
       And  his aﬀ ections dark as Erebus.
       Let  no such man be trusted.
           (V.i.83–88)


Lorenzo shows the same sensibility in all  his other speeches, and an aes-
thetic consciousness is evident as well in Bassanio’s descriptions of Portia 
and her wealth:


       Nor  is the wide world ignorant of her worth;
       For the four winds blow in from  every coast
       Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
       Hang  on her temples like a golden ﬂ eece,
       Which  makes her seat of Belmont Colchos’ strond,
       And  many Jasons come in quest of her.
           (I.i.167–72)


Portia’s wish that music accompany Bassanio’s choice of the casket shows 
and creates a similar aesthetic attentiveness:


       Let  music sound while he doth make his choice;
       Th en, if he lose, he makes a swanlike end,

151
142                                                W. H. Auden


        Fading  in  music. Th at the comparison
        May  stand  more  proper, my eye shall  be the stream
        And   wat’ry  deathbed for  him.  He  may win;
        And   what is  music then? Th en music  is
        Even  as the ﬂ ourish  when true  subjects bow
        To  a new-crowned   monarch. Such  it  is
        As  are those dulcet  sounds in  break of  day
        Th at creep into  the  dreaming  bridegroom’s  ear
        And   summon  him  to marriage.
            (III.ii.43–53)


        Portia  shows the same disposition in  criticizing   the various suitors she has 
not liked:  the Neapolitan  who  boasts of his horse—gents  don’t boast—and  the 
Count  Palatine, who is gloomy, full of “unmannerly  sadness” (I.ii.54)—one  must 
be gay. Th ough gaiety must have a limit. At a lunch party in the  south of France, 
during the Spanish  Civil  War, a voice pipes up, “Spain must be madly ungay this 
summer.” Th e story goes that  in  the last  war a Guards  oﬃ  cer who was home 
on leave was asked what war was like, and answered, “So annoying—the   noise, 
and the people.” Again, in the  last war, a friend  of mine  who  went  over the top 
and didn’t shoot, took  a rug and a book, was wounded, and lay comfortably   and 
read until they  came for him.  Portia criticizes  Monsieur  Le  Bon because “He is 
every man in no man” (I.ii.64–65)—one   must be an individual and have a center, 
whether it is shown or not.  She ﬁ nds fault with Falconbridge because, though he 
tries, he’s not chic, speaks no languages, and is “oddly  . . . suited” (I.ii.79)—one 
mustn’t be provincial.  Th e Scottish lord, who  “borrowed  a box in  the ear of the 
Englishman,  and swore he would pay him  again when he was able” (I.ii.84–86), 
is rejected for  lacking  esprit,  being too  dull.  Th e Duke  of  Saxony’s nephew, a 
drunken boor, is rejected because one must have good manners.
        One  must  also  be quite  carefree  and  unpossessive. When  Jessica joins 
this society,  the ﬁ rst  thing  that  upsets Shylock   is that  she spends  four  score 
ducats in  one evening  and buys a monkey   for a ring.  Be  free with   money, be 
imprudent,  always gamble,  and as in Gratiano’s  marriage,  act on impulse.  Bet 
on the  ﬁ rst boy, always wagering   money on  chance. Th e Venetians are fash-
ionably  frivolous,   and  it  is true  that,  like   all frivolous   people,  they’re  also a 
little  sad. In  the opening  lines  of the  play, Antonio   says,


        In  sooth,  I know   not why  I  am so sad.
        It  wearies me;  you say it  wearies you;
            (I.i.1–2)


and he tells  Gratiano,

152
                                           The Merchant of Venice                              143


       I  hold the world but as the world, Gratiano—
       A  stage; where every man must play a part,
       And  mine a sad one.
           (I.i.77–79)


Portia echoes him at the start of  the second scene when she says, “By my 
troth, Nerissa, my little  body is  aweary of this great world”  (I.ii.1–2). She 
treats the feeling more lightly than it  in fact is in  order not to bore people. 
Gratiano, a frivolous  chatterbox, a Gentile opposite of  Shylock, is a type 
of his society, and he’s the only one who doesn’t wish to pardon Shylock. 
Speaking at one point of Lorenzo’s lateness, Gratiano says that chasing is 
more fun than catching: “All  things that  are / Are with  more spirit chased 
than enjoy’d” (II.vi.12–13).
       Unlike  a feudal society, which is based on land, the basis of this soci-
ety is money coming from speculative trade, not from production, as in an 
industrial society. It is possible to become suddenly rich or suddenly poor, and 
money has commodity as well as exchange value. As a moneylender, Shylock 
is guilty of usury. Antonio, when he asks for the loan from Shylock, says:


       If  thou wilt  lend this money, lend it not
       As to  thy friends—for when did friendship take
       A  breed for barren metal of his friend?
       But  lend it rather to thine enemy,
       Who  if  he break, thou mayst with better face
       Exact the penalty.
           (I.iii.133–38)


The condemnation of the breeding of money by money goes back to Aristo-
tle, and in Canto XI  of the  Inferno, Virgil castigates the moneylenders and 
associates them with sodomists:


         Violence may be done against the Deity, in the heart denying 
       and blaspheming Him; and disdaining Nature and her bounty:
         and hence the smallest round seals with its mark both Sodom 
       and Cahors, and all who speak with disparagement of God in 
       their  hearts.


Cahors was a center of non-Jewish usury and of misbelievers. Virgil  also 
instructs Dante that Genesis “behoves man to gain his bread and prosper” 
and that “because the usurer takes another way, he contemns Nature in her-
self and in her follower, placing elsewhere his hope.”

153
144                                          W. H. Auden


       At  the time Th e Merchant of Venice was written, however, these traditional 
attitudes against usury were breaking down. In an economy for direct consump-
tion or barter borrowing, the borrowing of money is an exception, and money is 
not a commodity that one sells for a proﬁ t—which is how we would feel if we 
were asked for interest on the loan of a dollar from a friend. In a society where 
money becomes generally needed, a conﬂ ict arises between the abhorrence of 
usury and the necessity for it. Th e hypocrisy is that though moneylending will 
be condemned and the lender despised, men will still go to the moneylender. 
Shylock’s argues that Laban’s method of producing parti–colored sheep, though 
not “directly int’rest,” “was a way to thrive, and he was blest; / And thrift is 
blessing, if men steal it not” (I.iii.78, 90–91). Antonio objects, saying,


       Th is was a venture, sir, that Jacob serv’d for;
       A  thing not in  his power to bring to pass,
       But  sway’d and fashion’d by the hand of heaven.
       Was this inserted to make interest good?
       Or  is your gold and silver ewes and rams?
           (I.iii.92–96)


Nonetheless, Shylock’s commentary on Laban’s sheep was actually used by 
theologians trying to give interest canonical legality. Moneylending  serves 
the need for ready cash. Because it is regarded as immoral, however, it is 
handed over to outsiders. The madame runs the brothel, but the senator still 
visits it. It’s a bad situation for  outsiders, who will go  to a job from  which 
they are not excluded, to the most lucrative job, but one that is socially con-
demned: moneylending.
       Wealth in  Venetian society depends upon speculation and exploitation. 
Shylock points this out when he justiﬁ es his possession of the pound of ﬂ esh 
by arguing from the Gentiles’ unwillingness to free their slaves:


       What  judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
       You have among you many a purchas’d slave,
       Which,  like your asses and your dogs and mules,
       You use in abject and in slavish parts,
       Because you bought them. Shall I say to you,
       “Let  them be free, marry them to your heirs!
       Why  sweat they under burthens? Let their beds
       Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
       Be season’d with such viands”? You will answer,
       “Th e slaves are ours.” So do I answer you.

154
                                           The Merchant of Venice                              145


       Th e pound of ﬂ esh which I demand of him
       Is dearly bought, ’tis mine, and I will have it.
           (IV.i.89–100)


       Within   the  charmed social circle of Venice and Belmont,  all is love, 
aﬀ ection, grace, wit, beauty, riches. Th e improper suitors are seen as outsiders. 
Shylock sums them up as an outsider par excellence. He is an outsider partly 
by religion, which  is not  too important,  more a formal, social matter, and 
partly by profession, which partially reﬂ ects the extravagance of society itself. 
But he is an outsider chieﬂ y by character, for which society is partly respon-
sible, though social conditions are never quite enough to determine character. 
In contrast to the others, he’s gloomy, priggish, and hates music. He enjoins 
Jessica not to listen to the masques:


       What,  are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica.
       Lock  up my doors; and when you hear the drum
       And  the vile squeaking of the wry-neck’d ﬁ fe,
       Clamber not you up to the casements then,
       Nor  thrust your head into the public street
       To gaze on Christian fools with varnish’d faces;
       But  stop my house’s ears—I mean my casements.
       Let  not the sound of shallow fopp’ry enter
       My  sober house.
           (II.v.28–36)


       Shylock is too  serious. He’s not really more acquisitive than the other 
Venetians—they, too, clearly seek proﬁ t—but he is more possessive, he keeps 
his possessions to himself, and he does not value personal relationships. He 
is more concerned about his ducats and diamonds than his daughter, and he 
cannot imagine making a sacriﬁ ce to personal relations.


       Why, there, there, there, there! A diamond gone cost me two 
       thousands ducats in Frankford! Th e curse never fell upon our 
       nation till  now; I  never felt it till now. Two thousand ducats in 
       that, and other precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter 
       were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear! Would she were 
       hears’d at my foot, and the ducats in her coﬃ  n! No news of them? 
       Why, so—and I know not what’s spent in the search. Why, thou 
       loss upon loss! the thief gone with so much, and so much to ﬁ nd 
       the thief, and no satisfaction, no revenge! nor no ill luck stirring 

155
146                                          W. H. Auden


       but what lights o’ my shoulders; no sighs but o’ my breathing; no 
       tears but o’ my shedding.
           (III.i.87–101)


       Why  does Shylock ﬁ nally alienate our sympathy, even though we can 
understand his wanting revenge? Part of the reason is that his revenge is in 
excess of the injury—a characteristic of revenge plays. But he mainly alien-
ates our sympathy because he tries to play it safe and use the law, which is 
universal, to exact a particular, personal revenge. A private quest for revenge 
may have started a feud, but would be forgivable. What is not forgivable is 
that he tried to get revenge safely. Shylock’s unlimited hatred is the negative 
image of the inﬁ nite love of Venetian and Belmont society, which proposes 
that one should behave with a love that is inﬁ nitely imprudent. “Who choos-
eth me must give and hazard all he hath,” the motto of the lead casket, is also 
the motto of the play.
       Legality  is a problem in  the play, as in Measure for Measure. A law is 
either a law of or a law for. Th e law of gravitation is a law of, a description of 
a pattern of regular behavior observed by disinterested observers. Th ere must 
be no exception and no caprice. Conformity is necessary for the law to exist, 
for if  an exception is found, the law has to be rewritten in such a way that 
the exception becomes part of the pattern, for it is a presupposition of sci-
ence that events in nature conform to law—in other words, a physical event is 
always related to some law, even if it be one of which scientists are at present 
ignorant. Laws for, like human legislation, are patterns of behavior imposed 
on behavior that was previously lacking in pattern. In order for the laws to 
come into existence, there must be at least some people who don’t conform 
to them—there is no American law, for example, dealing with cannibalism. 
Unlike laws of, which must completely explain how events occur, laws for are 
only concerned with commanding or prohibiting the class of actions to which 
they refer, and a man is only related to the law when it is a question of doing 
or not doing one act of such a class. When his actions are not covered by law, 
when alone in a room reading a book, for example, he is related to no law at 
all. Th e Merchant of Venice shows that morals are not to be thought of as laws 
of, that laws for can’t account for all actions, and that ethics can’t be based on 
right, but must be based on duty.
       How   do we judge the  means and ends of action? Utilitarian  theory 
doesn’t consider the choice of means, but argues that utility and right  are 
identical. But why is a key “right” in opening a door and a bent wire “wrong”? 
Kant and Fichte ask, what is your ethical duty if you know where A is, and 
B, who intends to murder A, asks you where A is? If your assumption is that 
you must tell the truth, then what? Kant argues that you must tell. Or, if your 

156
                                           The Merchant of Venice                              147


assumption is that human life is sacred, then you don’t tell. Duty is not what 
is conformable to right, but to what  I owe. Th ere is no refuge in generality, 
the choice is speciﬁ c. Th ere are no alternatives, the choice must be mine. And 
ought implies can. Antonio’s sense of inﬁ nite obligation links utility and duty, 
as utility and  right cannot  be linked. Right  states that a man should help 
friends, but doesn’t explain why. Shylock thinks of duty upside down, and sees 
a one-to-one relation between action and intention. He tries to get Antonio. 
His mistake is that he tries to invoke the law and gets caught out. Laws are 
not adapted to particular ends, but deal with generalities. It’s amazing that 
the Doge and others didn’t realize that the bond involved bloodshed, but we 
have to accept that.
       Th e question the play raises is, how shall I behave? I might assume that 
if I follow  the rules, I’m okay, but Portia points out that obediences diﬀ er:


             Th erefore, Jew,
       Th ough justice be thy plea, consider this—
       Th at, in the course of justice, none of us
       Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,
       And  that same prayer doth teach us all to render
       Th e deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
       To mitigate the justice of thy plea.
           (IV.i.197–203)


Portia, on the other hand, does trust to a legal generalization to free a man 
from an evil character:


       But  in the cutting it  if thou dost shed
       One drop of Christian  blood, thy lands and goods
       Are, by the laws of Venice, conﬁ scate
       Unto  the state of Venice.
           (IV.i.309–12)


       A  shyster lawyer uses the same kind of argument. A  “Proﬁ le” of the 
nineteenth-century New  York criminal  law ﬁ rm, Howe  and Hummel,  in 
the New Yorker, describes how William F. Howe got one his clients oﬀ  on a 
charge of arson. Howe arranged for a plea bargain on the charge of attempted 
arson, and when his client, Owen Reilly,


       came  up  for  sentence, Howe arose and  pointed out   that  the 
       law  provided no penalty  for attempted arson. Th e court begged 
       enlightenment. Th e sentence for attempted arson, Howe explained, 

157
148                                          W. H. Auden


       like   the  sentence for   any  crime  attempted  but  not   actually 
       committed,  was  half  the   maximum  imposed by  law  for   the 
       actual commission of  the  crime. Th e penalty for arson was life 
       imprisonment. Hence, if  the court  were to determine a sentence 
       for  Reilly, it  would  have to determine what half  a life  came to. 
       “Scripture tells us that we knoweth not the day nor the hour of our 
       departure,” Howe said. “Can this court sentence this prisoner at the 
       bar to  half of his natural life? Will  it  then sentence him to half a 
       minute  or to half the  days of Methuselah?” Th e court agreed that 
       the problem was beyond its earthbound wisdom.


By a similar kind of argument, Howe argued in 1888 that a convicted cop-
killer,  Handsome Harry   Carlton,  could not  be executed. The  Electrical 
Death Penalty law of that year had suspended hanging as of 4 June 1888 and 
installed electrocution as of 1 January 1889. Howe was able to argue that 
between June 4th and January 1st, murder was legal, since through the care-
less syntax of the bill, the law appeared to read that during that period there 
was no legal penalty for murder. And without  a penalty, Howe said, there 
could be no crime. A higher court disposed of the problem, and Handsome 
Harry  didn’t get off,  but for  a while in  New York  murder seemed techni-
cally legal. Ergo, law is  fundamentally frivolous, whereas a moral sense is 
serious. Hard cases make bad law. “Sell all thou hast and give to the poor” 
is a particular command, not a law.
       Shylock is the outsider because he is the only serious person in the play. 
He may be serious about the wrong things, the acquisition of property, since 
property is itself a  frivolous thing. In  contrast, however, we have a society 
that is frivolous because certain gifts are necessary to belong to it—beauty, 
grace, wit, riches. Nothing that doesn’t apply to everyone can be serious, and 
a frivolous society makes life a game. But life is not a game because one can-
not say: “I will live if I turn out to be good at living.” No, gifted or not, I must 
live. Th ose who cannot play a game can always be spectators, but no one can 
be a spectator of life; he must either live himself or hang himself. Th e Greeks, 
being aesthetes, regarded life as a game, i.e., as a test of inborn areté. Th e 
compensation for the chorus who could not play was to enjoy seeing the star 
players come one by one to a sticky end.
       An  aesthetically conceived society depends on the exploitation of the 
ungifted. A society constructed to be like a beautiful poem—as was imagined 
by some aesthetically-minded Greek political theorists—would be a night-
mare of horror, for given the historical reality of actual men, such a society 
could only come into being through selective breeding, extermination of the 
physically and mentally unﬁ t, absolute obedience to its Director, and a large 

158
                                                The Merchant of Venice                                     149


slave class kept  out  of  sight  in  cellars. Th e people in  Th e Merchant of Venice 
are saved by their  excess of love, which   destroys the  pattern  of  exclusiveness 
generated by self-love.
        Whenever    a  society   is  exclusive,  it   needs  something   excluded   and 
unaesthetic  to  deﬁ ne  it,  like  Shylock.   Th e only  serious  possession of  men 
is not  their   gifts  but  what  they  all  possess equally, independent   of  fortune, 
namely  their  will,   in  other  words,  their  love, and  the  only  serious  matter  is 
what  they  love—themselves,  or  God  and  their  neighbor.   Th e people in  Th e 
Merchant of Venice are generous, and they behave well  out  of a sense of social 
superiority.  Outside   of them  is  Shylock,  but  inside  is melancholy  and  a lack 
of serious  responsibilities—which     they’d  have  as farmers  or  producers,  but 
not  as speculators. Th ey are haunted  by an  anxiety  that  it  is not  good  sense 
for them  to  show.
        Th e caskets are the key to  the play. All   the suitors  are in  the right   social 
“set.” Two  of  them  do what  the  “set”  does. Th e ﬁ rst chooses the gold casket, 
“to  gain what  many  men  desire,” and  inside is  a death’s head. Death  is  what 
the aesthete is most afraid  of. Th e second suitor, seeking to “get as much  as he 
deserves,” chooses the silver casket, and inside is a portrait  of  a grinning   idiot, 
the specter behind natural  gifts. Th e third  casket, which Bassanio must choose, 
is made of lead—common,   universal, and unaesthetic—and  it  must  be chosen 
with  complete passion, for Bassanio must  give and hazard all he has.
        I  am  glad  that   Shakespeare made  Shylock  a  Jew. What   is the  source 
of  anti-Semitism?   Th e Jew represents  seriousness to  the   Gentile,  which   is 
resented, because we wish to be frivolous and do  not want  to be reminded  that 
something  serious exists. By their  existence—and this  is as it should be—Jews 
remind  us of this  seriousness, which  is why  we desire their  annihilation.


                                                         Notes

        This  lecture has been reconstructed from notes by Arisen and Griffin. Auden 
discusses The Merchant of Venice in “Brothers and Others,” DH, 218–37, and he wrote 
an article on the play, “Two Sides to a Thorny Problem,” for The New York Times, 1 
March 1953, section 2.

        Page

        139. “The  only racial remark . . . Christians refute it.”:  This statement is nei-
ther persuasive nor clear. Auden may be referring to Shylock’s assertion that he takes 
revenge “by Christian example” (III.i.73–74) and the Duke’s statement in pardoning 
him: “That  thou shalt see the difference of our spirit / I pardon thee thy life  before 
thou ask it” (IV.ii.368–69).
        139. “Religious  differences . . . treated frivolously”:  For  the connotations of 
Auden’s use of the word “frivolous” throughout this lecture and in  others, see DH, 
429–32.

159
150                                                W. H. Auden


        140. “The  first  four suitors”: The  first  suitors, on the contrary, leave because 
they wish to win Portia “by some other sort than your father’s imposition, depending 
on the caskets” (I.ii.113–15).
        140.  “Today there are . . .  laissez-faire society.”: Ansen’s notes read, “Today 
there are no personal obligations in  a laissez faire society, which comes round to 
status in totalitarian states.”
        140. E.  M. Forster, “I  Believe,” in I Believe, ed. Clifton Fadiman (New  York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1939), 81.
        141. “aesthetic awareness”: Auden’s sense of the word “aesthetic” depends, in 
part, on Kierkegaard. See, e.g., “Equilibrium Between the Aesthetical and the Ethi-
cal in the Composition of Personality,” Either/Or, 2:133–278; and FA, 172–74.
        142. “At  a lunch  party . . .”:  After  this sentence in his notes, Ansen inserts, 
with a caret, “Adrian and Francisco.” This may be Ansen’s interpolation, though his 
notes also suggest that Auden may have thrown it out to him as a hint during  the 
lecture. In Part II   of “The  Sea and the Mirror,”  Adrian  and Francisco say: “Good 
little sunbeams must learn to fly, / But it’s madly ungay when the goldfish die,” CP, 
415. Ansen was writing  a paper on “The Sea and the Mirror”   at the  time of  this 
lecture. See also Fuller, Auden: A Commentary, 361.
        142. “the noise, and the people”: Auden also recounts this story in ACW, 383.
        143. “back to Aristotle”:  Politics I. iv.
        143. Dante, Inferno, Canto XI,  The Divine Comedy, trans. Carlyle-Wicksteed, 
p. 68. In DH,  231, Auden quotes the same passage from the Inferno, and says about 
the collocation of Sodom and Cahors, which was known for its usurers, that it can 
“hardly be an accident that Shylock the usurer has as his antagonist a man whose 
emotional life, though  his conduct may be chaste, is concentrated upon a member 
of his own sex.”
        146.  “law of  or a  law for . . .  at present ignorant”:  From Auden’s review  of 
Kierkegaard, FA, 177.
        146.  “Utilitarian   theory  . . . are identical.”:  Ansen’s notes read, “Utilitarian 
theory doesn’t consider the choice of means, put as caprice, but argues that utility 
and right are identical.”
        146. “Kant  and Fichte ask”: See, e.g., Immanuel Kant, “On a Supposed Right 
to Tell Lies from Benevolent Motives.”
        147. “A ‘Profile’ ”: Richard Rovere, “Profiles: 89 Centre Street: II, The Weep-
ers,” The New Yorker, 30 November 1946, 48–49.
        148. “But  life is not a game . . . hang himself.”: From SO, 169.
        148. “The  Greeks . . . sticky end.”: From SO, 170.
        148. “A society constructed to be . . . cellars.”: Details from SO, 178, and DH, 
85.
        149. “The  only  serious . . . their neighbor.”: From  SO, 168–69, and cf. DH, 
431–32.
        149. “behave well out of a sense of social superiority”: After this sentence in his 
notes, Ansen writes, “can’t be friends?” The context of the phrase is unclear.
        149. “What  is  the source of anti-Semitism?”: See Auden as Didymus, 42–44, 
and lecture and notes on Richard III. Auden also discusses Jewish seriousness, “the 
Jewish passion for truth,” in “The Greeks and Us,” reprinted in FA, 14.

160
                             Peter         D.   HollanD


   The   Merchant       of   Venice    and   the  Value   of  Money






anyone    who reads or watches many Shakespeare plays grows accustomed 
to having to learn a new vocabulary for money. Marks, nobles, groats, 
crowns, pieces, shillings, pence, sovereigns and pounds—and that only cov-
ers some of the words used in the english histories. But we grow used to the 
notion that these terms are in a fixed or fixable relationship to each other. 
When in Henry V, nim complains that Pistol has not paid him ‘the eight 
shillings I won of you at betting’ (2.1.90–1),1 Pistol eventually offers him a 
deal: ‘a noble thou shalt have, and present pay’ (102). By checking the com-
mentary we can learn that, unwilling to pay in full, Pistol is offering him six 
shillings and eightpence, discounting the sum owed by one-sixth for a cash 
deal, supplemented by the promise of ‘liquor’. there is a system at work here 
that we can easily understand.
       In that strange and hugely underrated tragedy Timon of Athens, some-
thing rather odder happens. apart from some passing mentions of crowns and 
pieces, the standard form of currency being used in the play is a talent but there 
is considerable confusion about how much a talent is worth. In the first scene 
of the play it is clear that a talent is worth a considerable sum: timon’s reckless 
extravagance, his uncontrollable generosity is demonstrated by his willingness 
to pay five talents to release his friend Ventidius from prison (1.1.105) or by 
his giving three talents to his servant lucilius as a dowry to match the three 


From Cahiers Élisabéthains 60 (october 2001): 13–30. Copyright © 2001 by Cahiers 
Élisabéthains.


                                                  151

161
152                                        Peter D. Holland


talents that the unnamed Old Athenian will bestow on his daughter (1.1.149). 
For those with even faint memories of the parable of the talents in the New 
Testament this seems an appropriate scale of value. Technically a talent was 
worth 6,000 drachmas and equivalent to more than 50 pounds weight of silver. 
But by Act 2 talents are clearly worth much less—as if the economy of Athens 
has collapsed—and Timon, sending out his servants to various seeming friends 
to borrow money, instructs them: ‘Let the request be ﬁ fty talents’ (2.2.189). 
Inﬂ ation bites quickly and a few lines later he tells Flavius to ask the senators 
to ‘send o’th’ instant / A thousand talents to me’ (194–5). If three talents is a 
decent sized dowry, a dowry ﬁ t for the daughter of an Athenian gentleman, 
then a thousand talents is a wholly disproportionate sum. In Act three the 
playwright is totally confused: Flavius talks of ﬁ fty talents in 3.1, but in 3.2 the 
sums are carefully left vague and indeterminate as three times in the early part 
of the scene the precise sum is left out and the curious phrase ‘so many talents’ 
used: a servant tells Lucius, for example, that Timon is ‘requesting your lord-
ship to supply his instant use with so many talents’ (36–7). Lucius’s response is 
disbelief: ‘I know his lordship is but merry with me. / He cannot want ﬁ fty ﬁ ve 
hundred talents’ (38–9). ‘Fifty-ﬁ ve hundred’ is an odd phrase: it may represent 
an uncancelled correction, as if the author, having decided how many ‘so many’ 
should be, ﬁ rst wrote ﬁ fty and then ﬁ ve hundred and left them both in. In the 
last few years it has been strongly argued that Timon of Athens was not written 
by Shakespeare alone but instead that the play is a collaboration with Th omas 
Middleton and in  a number of places in his other plays Middleton seems to 
be fond of the number ﬁ fty-ﬁ ve.2 It looks as if the two authors forgot to agree 
about talents and Shakespeare had one value in mind when he was writing Act 
1 while Middleton had a rather diﬀ erent value in mind when he was writing 
Act 3 scene 2. In other words, each dramatist was clear for himself but the two 
systems do not match up.3
       I  have pursued the problem of the sums of money as a prelude to think-
ing about ducats, for as the references to ducats proliferate in Th e Merchant of 
Venice they begin to suggest a coherent economic and ﬁ scal system by which 
each sum of money can be weighed and valued, a system of diﬀ erence and 
connection in which the sums take on a life of their own, as if money were a 
strangely creative force in the play. Th e play’s economies, its systems of value 
are consistently measured against the coherence of the Venetian economy, a 
system where everyone has a clear idea of the worth of ducats. Apart from 
the bond of 3,000 ducats I want to concentrate on four other sums: 60,000, 
36,000, 1,000 and 80.4
       When  the news reaches Belmont that Antonio could not pay his bond 
when it came due and that the pound of ﬂ esh is now forfeit, Salerio makes 
clear that Shylock will no longer accept the repayment of the sum: ‘it should 

162
                         The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money        153


appear that if he had / Th e present money to discharge the Jew / He would 
not take it’ (3.2.270–2). As Shylock himself  makes clear in the trial scene, 
having the pound of Antonio’s ﬂ esh is worth the loss of the sum of the bond: 
‘Th e pound of ﬂ esh which I demand of him / Is dearly bought’ (4.1.98–9), the 
last phrase echoing Portia’s valuation of Bassanio’s love in relation to the gift 
she will make to him of money to settle Antonio’s debts, ‘Since you are dear 
bought, I will love you dear’ (3.2.311). Th is pound of human meat would cost 
Shylock 3,000 ducats or 6,600 ducats per kilo.
       Indeed it  would not matter to Shylock if he were oﬀ ered more. As Jes-
sica tells the gathering at Belmont:


             I  have heard him swear
       To Tubal and to Cush, his countrymen,
       Th at he would rather have Antonio’s ﬂ esh
       Th an twenty times the value of the sum
       Th at he did owe him . . . (3.2.282–6)


       So my ﬁ rst sum, 60,000, represents the limits of Shylock’s imaginings, 
a fantastical excess of over-re-payment. Repaying the principal twenty times 
for a bond for three months represents an 8,000% base annual rate of interest, 
even though here, of course, it will not be an interest payment but a penalty 
payment. Crucially Shylock’s bond has not been usurious and would have 
stood at no risk under English law, in particular the Statute of 1571 which 
deﬁ ned English legal attitudes at the time of Shakespeare’s writing Th e Mer-
chant of Venice. Any bond which charged interest at more than 10% could 
automatically be nulliﬁ ed under this act and a number of subsequent cases 
tightened attempts to evade the statute but Shylock’s bond would not have 
fallen foul of the statute or the case-law.5
       Shakespeare has allowed the numbers 60 and 1,000 to appear earlier in 
the scene in Portia’s extravagantly modest wish to be far fairer and richer, to 
be many times herself for Bassanio:


             yet for you
       I  would be trebled twenty times myself,
       A  thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich,
       Th at only to stand high in your account
       I  might in  virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
       Exceed account. (152–7)


But,  though  Portia’s  multiplication   tables include  wealth,  it   seems an 
abstracted conceptualisation of number, not something translatable into the 

163
154                                        Peter D. Holland


practice of Venetian or Belmontese economics. With Jessica’s statement it is 
newly grounded in the reality of Shylock’s commitment to his bond.
       Jessica makes her statement as forthrightly as she can but there seems to 
be some problem in Portia’s taking in the information. Perhaps she is simply 
not listening to the account. Certainly Jessica’s statement is not responded to 
at all for the line which follows it, spoken by Portia, is addressed not to Jessica 
but to Bassanio: ‘Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?’ (289) Th e hiatus 
here between statements might be signiﬁ cant. Th ere are many ways to play it: a 
deliberate ignoring of the Jewess’s words, a stunned silence at the absolute nature 
of her information, a delivery of Jessica’s speech to Lorenzo so that the others 
do not quite hear it, a comment to her love triggered by Jessica’s using Antonio’s 
name (284, 288). But, however it is played, the gap, the refusal of the normal 
mechanism of dialogue—statement and response—needs noting and playing. 
In that gap, the notion of the sum of money is translated into a deﬁ nition of 
social inter-relationship, the understanding of how Jewess and heiress interact.
       When  Portia does turn to the question of the sum, the riches of Belmont 
become apparent. We have known from the ﬁ rst mention of her—by Bassa-
nio to Antonio  in the ﬁ rst scene—that Portia has been ‘richly left’ (1.1.161), 
that she has inherited a considerable fortune from her father. Th at may have 
been manifest in modern productions in the opulence of the set for Belmont. 
Now, though, it becomes stated in terms of monetary value. Finding that the 
debt is 3,000 ducats, Portia replies:


             What, no more?
       Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond.
       Double six thousand and then treble that,
       Before a friend of this description
       Shall lose a hair thorough Bassanio’s fault. (296–300)


After  the  wedding  is solemnised, then,  even before it  is consummated, 
Portia suggests Bassanio rushes off to Venice: ‘You shall have gold / To pay 
the petty debt twenty times over’ (304–5). I suppose it all depends what you 
mean by petty. Portia finally  offers Bassanio precisely the sum that Jessica 
has already said Shylock will turn down. Where it was difficult for Antonio 
to raise 3,000 ducats, where even Shylock says that he cannot, in his present 
financial circumstances, lay his hands immediately on the money, ‘I cannot 
instantly raise up the gross / Of full three thousand ducats’ (1.3.53–4), Por-
tia has no hesitation in offering 60,000. ‘Richly left’ indeed.
       Along  the way, though, if the audience’s mental arithmetic keeps up with 
her lavishness, she oﬀ ers a sum of 36,000—‘Double six thousand, and then 
treble that’—and the sum reappears in the trial scene. Bassanio oﬀ ers Shylock 

164
                            The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money                  155


six thousand  ducats, the ﬁ rst ﬁ gure that  Portia  mooted  as suﬃ  cient to ‘deface 
the bond’  and  a sum  he has presumably  borrowed   from   Portia  anticipating, 
foolishly, that  it  would  be enough to  assuage Shylock’s demand for vengeance. 
If  we have a notion   of Bassanio as prodigal  and  wastrel, the  spendthrift   who 
has run through  his fortune   and is now dependent  on the  generosity of  Anto-
nio to  go a-wiving  in  the style  he thinks  appropriate,  then it  is oﬀ set by a cer-
tain caution   here or an  assumption  that  his understanding   of economics  will 
indicate  the suﬃ  ciency of 6,000 to appease Shylock’s greed. Bassanio’s notion 
of extravagance is,  in this  circumstance,  quite  circumspect,  taking  enough  of 
his newly  acquired wealth  to  do what  he thinks  is possible but  unwilling   now 
to go the  whole  way and use such a large  ﬁ gure, whatever it  may be as a pro-
portion  of Portia’s wealth,  to deal with  the Jew. But Shylock  responds: ‘If  every 
ducat in  six  thousand  ducats /  Were  in  six parts,  and  every part  a ducat,  /  I 
would  not draw  them’ (4.1.84–6).  Th e imaginary  sums of  ducats and the  idea 
of what  can be done with   them  now seem to  multiply.  Th e sums become cre-
ative and  fertile,  transferring   from  Belmont   to  Venice  without   any apparent 
means, magically  transporting   themselves from  one  place to  another. Money 
as a concept  is ﬂ uid and  transient   at exactly  the  point  in  the  play in  which, 
intransigent   and intractable   as he is at  his  most  extreme, Shylock  refuses to 
allow any  transfer of  sums at all.  As the  idea of what  constitutes  a lavish  sum 
moves from  Venice to  Belmont  and  back to Venice  so the money  itself is  tied 
up in   Shylock’s hatred   and  the  operation  of  justice.  It   all depends  now  on 
Shylock’s willingness  to accept any sum, on  his evaluation  of the  reasons to be 
merciful,  given that  there is  no legal compulsion   on him  to  accept the money. 
Indeed the  law is as immovable  as Shylock: Bassanio’s suggestion that  the law 
can be adjusted—‘Wrest   once the law  to your  authority.  / To  do a great  right, 
do a little  wrong  . . . ’ (212–3)—seems to  shock Portia:  ‘It  must not  be’ (215).
        Shylock’s  refusal continues the  original  agreement which  locked  the sum 
in an interest-free   contract  and deﬁ ned the non-ﬁ  nancial penalty  for  default-
ing. Signiﬁ  cantly, Shylock,  typed  and ﬁ gured as the usurer  by the  Christians, 
did not  charge Antonio   interest  on the  loan. As a gesture of  supposed friend-
ship, he has oﬀ ered the sum  interest-free:


        I  would  be friends  with   you and  have your love,
        Forget  the  shames that you  have stained me  with,
        Supply  your  present wants, and  take no  doit
        Of  usance for  my  moneys; and you’ll  not  hear me.
        Th is is kind  I  oﬀ er. (1.3.136–40)


        Bassanio’s reply picks  up, perhaps suspiciously, on  that  crucial  last word: 
‘Th is were kindness’ (141). ‘Kind’  and ‘kindness’ are a common  Shakespearean 

165
156                                        Peter D. Holland


pun. Editors usually manage not to spell it out suﬃ  ciently clearly but Shylock 
means both that he will be benevolent and generous but also that he will be of 
Antonio’s kind, like him in lending ‘out money gratis’, that the Jew is capable of 
and willing to behave like a Christian. Far from belonging to a necessarily other 
group, a subset of humanity or indeed a set of subhumanity, the group of Jews 
who are unable ever to be like Christians, Shylock oﬀ ers something else, a form 
of integration, of  eﬀ ective assimilation into the dominant Venetian culture, 
through an acceptance of their business practices in this one oﬀ er at least. It is a 
notion keyed into this discussion through Shylock’s elaborate description of the 
way Jacob made a fortune with the ewes, a process in which sex between rams 
and ewes becomes deﬁ ned as natural, species-speciﬁ c, ‘the deed of kind’ (84).
       But  there is a further problem, hinted at in  Shylock’s statement about 
where he will ﬁ nd the additional part of the  3,000 ducats that he does not 
have available: ‘Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe, / Will furnish me’ (55–
6). One of the crucial passages on usury is in Deuteronomy chapter 23, verses 
19–20 and I quote from  the  Geneva Bible (1587), one of the translations 
Shakespeare is likely to have known:


       Th ou shalt not give to usurie to thy brother: as usurie of money, 
       usurie of meat, usurie of any thing that is put to usurie. Unto a 
       stranger thou mayest lend upon usurie, but thou shalt not lend 
       upon usurie unto thy brother, that the Lord thy God may bless 
       thee in all that thou settest thine hand to, in the land whither 
       thou  goest to possesse it.


       Th e marginal gloss in the Geneva Bible to the phrase about lending to a 
stranger reads ‘Th is was permitted for a time for the hardnesse of their heart’, a 
reminder of the depth of antagonism to usury even at a point where the Bible 
explicitly permits it. When Shylock borrows money from Tubal, a member of 
his tribe, a brother in the sense that the biblical phrase implies, Tubal would 
be unable to charge Shylock interest, even though the eventual destination of 
the money is Antonio—or properly Bassanio. Of course there will be noth-
ing remotely like a legal agreement for that loan between Christians: it is a 
bargain between gentlemen, a gentleman’s agreement, a loan without security 
which depends on the accuracy of Bassanio’s aim with the arrows:


       In  my schooldays, when I had lost one shaft,
       I  shot his fellow of the selfsame ﬂ ight
       Th e selfsame way with more advisèd watch,
       To ﬁ nd the other forth, and by adventuring both
       I  oft found both. (1.1.140–4)

166
                         The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money         157


       Th is image of Bassanio’s is the only real economic justiﬁ cation or secu-
rity he oﬀ ers Antonio for Antonio’s pouring yet more money into Bassanio’s 
hands. Th e argument is doubly unconvincing: ﬁ rstly it is simply an account of 
a frequent, but not consistent, solution (‘I oft found both’); secondly, it is sim-
ply a false account of eﬀ ective archery, for the schoolboy who mistakes his aim 
will be unable to replicate the mis-shot on any but the rarest of occasions.
       Bassanio is doubly Antonio’s debtor: ‘To you, Antonio, / I owe the most 
in money and in love’ (1.1.130–1). Bassanio is bound in love to Antonio; he 
needs to repay that love as well as the money. But some of his other debts 
have—he hints—a more substantial obligation:


             my chief care
       Is to  come fairly oﬀ  from the great debts
       Wherein  my time, something too prodigal,
       Hath  left me gaged. (127–30)


What  happens to a Venetian gentleman like Bassanio, unlike a merchant 
such as Antonio, when he fails to meet the due date of his other debts is far 
from clear in the play. Gentlemen, especially gentlemen without other forms 
of income than their inherited wealth and with  no intention of working  for 
a living even by the trade of mercantile speculation, live on credit. Antonio’s 
letter to  Bassanio indicates that when a merchant falls on hard times,  all 
credit is called in:  ‘my creditors grow  cruel’ (3.2.314) writes Antonio  and 
we might  reasonably assume that Shylock is the only Jew amongst them. 
Characteristically, however, the language of economics affects Bassanio’s 
description to Antonio here, at the beginning of the play, about his style of 
living: he has showed


             a more swelling port
       Th an my faint means would grant continuance,
       Nor  do I now make moan to be abridged
       From such a noble rate. (1.1.124–7)


‘Rate’ is usually glossed as ‘style’ but the word also suggests a rate of expen-
diture: Shylock speaks of Antonio bringing down ‘[t]he  rate of usance here 
with us in Venice’ (1.3.42); Morocco wonders whether Portia is ‘rated by thy 
estimation’ (2.7.26); Bassanio, trying to explain his poverty to Portia, speaks 
of ‘[r]ating myself at nothing’ (3.2.255). A word intrinsically bound up with 
finance is here appropriated by and appropriate to the nature of gentlemanly 
and gentile existence, living at ‘a noble rate’. But the word spirals outwards, 
as so often  with  Shakespeare’s language, for Antonio’s attitude  towards 

167
158                                        Peter D. Holland


Shylock is also a matter of ‘rate’: not long after he has spoken in aside about 
‘the rate of usance’ Shylock uses both nouns again, separated more widely 
in a sentence,


       Signior Antonio,  many a time and oft
       In  the Rialto you have rated me
       About  my moneys and my usances. (1.3.105–07)


Now  the word  ‘rate’, changed from  noun  to  verb, carries the  notion  of 
opprobrium: Antonio berates Shylock for his rate of usance. One man’s rate 
deserves another man’s berating; Shylock’s rate turns him into a loan shark 
or, to extend a pun that Shylock explores, a land-rat, a pirate.
       Antonio’s  practice of  loans without  interest ‘brings down  /  Th e rate 
of usance here with us in Venice’, threatening the economic basis of Jewish 
income since Jews were more or less restricted to usury as a form of income, 
unable to make speculative investments in trade of the kind that Antonio so 
extravagantly has done in consigning his wealth to the ships heading across 
the world in diﬀ erent directions. Risky though such ventures could be, Anto-
nio has been both extravagant and cautious. It may be that all his wealth is 
bound up in these ventures, that he has no liquidity, no monetary assets and 
indeed no assets suﬃ  ciently assured to enable others to use them as security 
for a loan. But he has chosen to spread the risk. As Shylock reminds Bassanio 
in the scene where the loan is set up, ‘He hath an argosy bound to Tripo-
lis, another to the Indies. I  understand moreover upon the Rialto he  hath 
a third at Mexico, a fourth for  England, and other ventures he hath squan-
dered abroad’ (1.3.17–21) Squandering is signiﬁ cant: Shylock suggests that 
the ventures are a waste of money, a kind of venture that would be bound to 
lead to inevitable loss and catastrophe. Antonio, at this point, appears a little 
like Bassanio, another ﬁ gure who has squandered his wealth incautiously. But 
such enterprises could produce phenomenal proﬁ ts, a return on investment of 
many thousand per cent, far beyond anything that usury or the simple charg-
ing of non-usurious interest could expect. It may be something of a lottery 
but there were enough examples in England of merchants who had grown 
fantastically rich on the proﬁ ts of a single such voyage. Venture capitalism in 
a context of mercantilist culture was the risky but often remarkably successful 
route to wealth.
       Viewed  in  this  way, Antonio’s  sending out  his  argosies to trade is 
remarkably like the reason that Bassanio needs to borrow the 3,000 ducats 
in the ﬁ rst place. Th e journey to Belmont is a sea-voyage, a speculative enter-
prise. Unlike Antonio who spreads the risk by having a whole series of dif-
ferent ships out at sea, a ﬂ eet of ventures, Bassanio will sink all his money in 

168
                            The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money                  159


one last-ditch   eﬀ ort to  extricate  himself   from  debt. Th e journey  to  Belmont 
becomes, in Bassanio’s ﬁ rst description  of it,  an epic quest, a voyage premised 
on the  nature of  Portia’s hair:


               her sunny  locks
        Hang   on her  temples like  a golden  ﬂ eece,
        Which   makes  her seat of Belmont   Colchis’  strand,
        And   many Jasons come in  quest of her. (1.1.169–72)


        Th e risky  voyage to  Colchis  undertaken   by Jason and  the  argonauts to 
bring  back the Golden   Fleece objectiﬁ es Portia  as a mythic  object to  be won; 
the Fleece  becomes her  hair  and the  temple  where  it  was hanging  becomes 
nothing  more religious  than  a part of her head. When  Bassanio chooses aright 
in the  lottery  (another   speculative venture),  Graziano  comments  ‘We  are the 
Jasons; we have won  the  ﬂ eece’ (3.2.239) and  the  image  returns.  Perhaps it 
is a language that  Bassanio would   only use to  Antonio,   a kind  of  demeaning 
assessment of  the  meaning  of  his  enterprise   that  he  would   never voice  to 
Portia, but  no such  notion  of  tact inhibits   Graziano.
        But   why  does Bassanio need  the money?  Th ere is a striking   diﬀ erence 
between the  epic  quest that  Bassanio  seems to be  undertaking   in  venturing 
from  Venice  to Belmont   and  the kind  of  journey  from   Padua to Venice  that 
Portia  describes when instructing   Balthasar  to  visit  Bellario:


               look  what notes  and garments  he doth  give thee,
        Bring   them, I  pray  thee, with  imagined  speed,
        Unto   the traject,  to  the common  ferry
        Which   trades  to Venice. (3.4.51–4)


There  seems to  be  a  regular  public   transport   system  around   of  traghetti, 
Italian   ferries.  Where   Bassanio  needs to  be  decked  out  at  the  right  noble 
rate for  this  great questing  journey,  caparisoned  in  the style  to which   he has 
been accustomed  and  in  which   he hopes  marriage  to  Portia   will   maintain 
him,   Portia  suggests  a  rather  different    way  of  navigating   these  ventures: 
one  simply   checks  the  timetable    and  catches  the  next   ferry.6  Bassanio’s 
voyage, his  stylish   venture   which   will   cost  3,000  ducats  to  set  up,  needs 
such extravagance  not  to  impress Portia   but  to  ‘hold  a rival  place’  (1.1.174) 
with  the  other  Jasons. Once Bassanio  has got  the 3,000  ducats,  we see him 
using it  by instructing    a servant  to ‘put  the  liveries  to making’   (2.2.110–11), 
ensuring  his  servants  will   represent  his  state  properly  at  Belmont,   so  that 
his new  servant  Gobbo   will   have an  especially  ornamental   outfit,   ‘a  livery 
/ More   guarded  than  his  fellows’  (149–50).  But  Bassanio has other   uses for 

169
160                                        Peter D. Holland


the money: he will spend some of it on a ‘supper’, a party before the voyage 
at which he will  ‘feast tonight / My  best-esteemed acquaintance’ (165–6), a 
feast which will include a spectacle of a masque. Such extravagance among 
his fellows in  Venice, like the proper appearance among his rivals in Bel-
mont, is for Bassanio the right way of spending Antonio’s loan. As far as he 
is concerned, this male rivalry is what matters and the expenditure of even 
such a large sum as this looks to him like ‘thrift’: ‘I have a mind presages me 
such thrift /  That I  should questionless be fortunate’ (1.1.175–6).
       We  will hear the word ‘thrift’  again later in the play and the cluster of 
meaning that surrounds it  is another part  of the  play’s revaluation of the 
language of money. Th ree of its occurrences will come from Shylock. In that 
powerful long aside about Antonio, ‘How like a fawning publican he looks’, 
he complains that Antonio rails ‘On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift’ 
(1.3.48). He ends the long strange description of Jacob’s tricking Laban, a 
passage which characterises the otherness of his linguistic register so strongly, 
with the statement ‘thrift is blessing, if men steal it not’ (87). Talking with Jes-
sica, he lets the word appear in connection with another rather glib moral cli-
ché: ‘Fast bind, fast ﬁ nd—/ A proverb never stale in thrifty mind’ (2.5.53–4). 
Making a proﬁ t is now a matter of thrift. Being careful with one’s resources 
is a good lesson for anyone wanting to be thrifty. One meaning of thrift  is 
being economical with one’s assets: as Hamlet tells Horatio about the rapid 
sequence of his father’s funeral and his mother’s remarriage, ‘Th rift, thrift, 
Horatio. Th e funeral baked meats / Did coldly  furnish forth  the  marriage 
tables’ (1.2.179–80). But that is not quite what Shylock means. ‘Th rift’ here 
in Th e Merchant of Venice is allowed to connect to its cognate verb, ‘to thrive’. 
Where ‘thrift’ might  suggest being frugal, ‘thrive’ might suggest to Bassanio 
being extravagant; certainly for Shylock it suggests being hugely successful. 
For Shylock the two may come together: as Shylock says of Jacob’s stratagem, 
‘Th is was a way to thrive; and he was blest’ (1.3.88). Like Bassanio’s ﬁ rst use of 
‘thrift’, thrifty  thriving  is a way to be ‘fortunate’. Jacob’s trick is a substantially 
proﬁ table enterprise, a little like sharp practice perhaps in the way of persuad-
ing the ewes to generate more ‘parti-coloured lambs’ which would be Jacob’s 
but a trick that the Old Testament and Shylock seem to approve of.
       If  you make the  right—that  is, thrifty—choice  you should thrive but 
gold is not necessarily the way to thrift and thriving. A later appearance of the 
word is at the end of Morocco’s speech of choice. He chooses the golden cas-
ket: ‘Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may’ (2.7.60). Th is choice, the reverse 
one might think  of being thrifty,  is no way to thrive. Th e meagre choice of 
lead, the thriftiest substance used in the manufacture of the caskets, proves to 
be the right way to thrive. Bassanio’s journey will be thrifty in the sense that 
it will  be proﬁ table but the way to achieve it is, for Bassanio, to ensure that 

170
                            The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money                  161


he continues to  appear at the  same ‘noble rate’ that had  got him  into  ﬁ nancial 
trouble  before.
        Th ere is here  an ambiguity   about  how   one uses one’s resources that  is 
central to  the conﬂ ict  of care and extravagance in  the play. For Bassanio to  be 
truly  thrifty   he must ‘give  and hazard all  he hath’ (2.7.16),  venture everything 
to  gain  the  golden  ﬂ eece. It  suggests the  problem   in  the  play’s  last use  of 
thrift.  Lorenzo   teases—or taunts—Jessica  that


               In  such a night
        Did   Jessica steal from the  wealthy  Jew,
        And   with  an unthrift    love did  run  from  Venice
        As  far as Belmont.  (5.1.14–17)


Lorenzo’s  language  is  disconcertingly    ambiguous:  does  Jessica ‘steal’ away 
from   Shylock   or  does  she  steal  money  from    him?  Is   the  ‘unthrift     love’ 
Jessica’s love for  Lorenzo,   her  emotions   and,  as I   shall  suggest,  financial 
practices that  are  not restricted   by the  habits  of her  father  whose ‘fast  bind, 
fast find’   is his form   of thrift;    or is the  ‘love’ Lorenzo   himself,   a spendthrift 
like  Bassanio  who  needs  Jessica’s wealth  as much,  or  even  more,  than   he 
needs Jessica?
        But  the  ﬁ nancing  of Bassanio’s venture  also aﬀ ects another  area of lin-
guistic  terminology,   a value-system  that  Shylock  suggests is connected  with 
money. As Shylock,  in  conversation  with   Bassanio, considers whether  Anto-
nio  is a  reasonable risk,  he  comments  to  Bassanio  ‘Antonio   is a  good  man’ 
(1.3.12).  Bassanio bridles  at  the  suggestion  that  he might   be  anything  else: 
‘Have you  heard any  imputation   to  the  contrary?’ (13–14).  And  Shylock   has 
to spell out  to  this apparently  unbusinesslike  ﬁ gure how  the  word ‘good’  is to 
be understood  in this  context:


        Ho,  no, no, no,  no! My  meaning  in  saying he  is a good man  is to 
        have you  understand  me that  he is suﬃ  cient. Yet his means are in 
        supposition.  (15–17)


Being  ‘sufficient’,   the  opposite  of being  prodigal,   is  to have sufficient    sums 
available,  to  be  solvent,  not  bankrupt    like  Bassanio,  to   be affluent,    well-
to-do.  It  is  not  only  a question  of  Antonio’s   status but  also  whether  he is  a 
decent business  risk.  Morality,    at  least in  the  way  that  Bassanio  hears  the 
word ‘good’,  is bound  here to  the  language of  business. Whether   Antonio   is 
moral or  not, kind,  generous, good-hearted   or any other  meaning  of the word 
in conventional   moral terms,  is irrelevant  to  good business practices.  Shylock 
is only  concerned whether   Antonio   is good  for  the  money’s repayment.

171
162                                        Peter D. Holland


       Yet the bond is made without interest. Assimilation and acceptance by 
the gentile, gentle, aristocratic world of Venetian Christians will cost Shylock 
an entrance fee, the refusal of interest. He oﬀ ers it as a gesture of being of the 
same kind, of belonging naturally to the group of humans, the social grouping 
on whose margins he exists: ‘Th is kindness will I show’ (142). Among people 
of the same kind there can be game-playing and even something as serious as 
a bond, a legal document that underpins the basis of the state as a just insti-
tution in which business can be properly conducted, can be the subject for ‘a 
merry sport’ (144), the condition which is attached to the bond by Shylock, 
the price of forfeiture at a pound of ﬂ esh. Th e aspiration for acceptance may 
of course be only a lie and Shylock’s long aside, ‘How like a fawning publican 
he looks’ (39–50), belies the gesture of friendship.
       But there are other ways of making money than mercantile speculation of 
trade or charging high rates of interest; one way is betting. Just before the threat 
posed by Shylock bursts into the restrained world of Belmont, Graziano sug-
gests that fertility can be a way of making money fertile, making it as creative as 
the sexual activity he and Nerissa will enjoy as man and wife: ‘We’ll play with 
them the ﬁ rst boy for a thousand ducats’ (3.2.213). Nerissa is hesitant about 
how the wager will be set up: ‘What, and stake down?’ (214). Her meaning, that 
the money would have to be laid on the table for the wager to be valid, is taken 
in a diﬀ erent way by her future husband: ‘No, we shall ne’er win at that sport 
and stake down’ (215). Typically Graziano turns her ﬁ nancial argument into a 
sexual pun, for he plays on the other meaning of ‘stake down’ as ‘with a limp 
penis’. If he cannot get an erection the son will never be conceived. Making 
money in this context is an expression of masculinity, an extension to his virility. 
Th e more often his penis is hard, the more likely they are quickly to conceive a 
son worth a thousand ducats. A bet becomes a dirty joke, a bawdy pun on the 
sexual activity which is after all the subject of the bet. In the economy of Gra-
ziano’s language such word-play, such creativity and multiplicity of language is 
fundamental—and in the infectious way his language operates I am left with 
the pun on ‘fundamental’ uncontrollably present.
       In  all kinds of ways there is nothing elsewhere in Shakespeare’s drama 
quite like the end of  this play but I  ﬁ nd the fact that it  gives its ﬁ nal lines 
to Graziano more than a little unnerving. No  other Shakespearean comedy 
ends with such a direct and bawdy pun: ‘Well, while I live I’ll fear no other 
thing /  So sore as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring’ (5.1.306–7). Th e play’s most 
recent editor, Jay Halio in the Oxford edition, spells out for us what the pun 
means, both a piece of jewellery and Nerissa’s vulva. Th e line is an allusion to 
an old joke, the assumption that the right way, indeed the only way, to keep 
one’s wife faithful is not to keep her ring on one’s ﬁ nger but to keep a ﬁ nger 
inserted in her vagina.

172
                         The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money         163


       But  when Halio suggests that ‘the romantic comedy appropriately ends 
on another bit of bawdy punning’ I have to disagree.7 Graziano’s pun is hor-
ribly reductive. Th e language of love has become the language of male fear 
of uncontrollable female sexual activity. Instead of allowing an unmediated 
focus on the rings  that have moved from  ﬁ nger to ﬁ nger throughout the 
later part of the play, Shakespeare instead requires that we become startlingly 
aware of Nerissa’s genitals. Modern productions usually balk at the implica-
tions of this, preferring to leave the pun undeﬁ ned and the attention of the 
audience looking at the ring now back on Graziano’s ﬁ nger but the pun is 
actively there, a threat to the kinds of emotions of love prevalent in the Por-
tia–Bassanio relationship. In its salacious punning it demeans the romantic 
world of  Belmont, a reminder  of the  laddish, loutish culture of  Venice to 
which Graziano—and Bassanio—belong.
       Th e movement of the  women’s rings serves to remind us of another 
ring in the play, another circle of prodigality and rejection of thrift, as well as 
providing a link to my last sum of ducats: 80. As Shylock laments the loss of 
his money and his daughter to Tubal, the latter passes on two pieces of news 
about Jessica’s activities in Genoa that he has gathered. ‘Your daughter spent 
in Genoa, as I heard, one night fourscore ducats.’ Shylock is tormented by the 
news: ‘Th ou stick’st a dagger in me. I shall never see my gold again. Fourscore 
ducats at a sitting? Fourscore ducats?’ (3.1.100–4). But worse is to follow: 
one of Antonio’s creditors, while telling Tubal that Antonio  is bound to go 
bankrupt, that ‘he cannot choose but break’ (106–7), showed him ‘a ring that 
he had of your daughter for a monkey.’


       Shylock. Out upon her! Th ou torturest me, Tubal. It was my 
       turquoise. I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor. I would not 
       have given it for a wilderness of monkeys. (110–14)


The two pieces of news seem to me strikingly different. The first is a simple 
mark of extravagance and of the impossibility of Shylock’s ever recovering 
all his gold.  He has lost money and jewels: one of the jewels, a diamond, 
‘cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfurt’ (79).
       Th is may be the moment ﬁ nally to consider the value of money. A ducat 
was an Italian gold coin, ﬁ rst minted in 1284, and widely copied. As Fischer 
states, the reverse of some ducats showed Christ and may therefore be the 
source of Shylock’s reported reference to his  ‘Christian  ducats’ (2.8.16).8 
Th ere were Italian silver ducats in circulation worth in England at the end 
of the  16th century approximately 3s. 41/2d. (approximately 161/2p.) but 
the Venetian coins of Th e Merchant of Venice are almost certainly gold ducats, 
worth at this point, according to Fischer, approximately 9s. (45p).9 In fact the 

173
164                                        Peter D. Holland


exchange rate was not ﬁ xed: in 1436–40 it was worth 45p in Venice (as pecu-
nia praesens) and 42p in London (‘where it was pecunia absens’).10 By 1503–6 
the rate was varying between 49p and 56p per ducat.11 As Antonio Salutati 
commented in 1416 in a merchant’s manual: ‘He who deals in exchanges and 
he who deals in merchandise is always anxious and beset by worries. I will 
instead give you a recipe for lasagna and macaroni’.12
       Shakespeare uses the term ‘ducat(s)’ 59 times in ten plays, though 33 of 
all occurrences occur in Th e Merchant of Venice. It is one of the units of cur-
rency in Illyria (Twelfth Night), Italy (e.g. Cymbeline), Denmark (Hamlet) and 
Ephesus (Comedy of Errors).13 Unlike the kinds of problems with talents in 
Timon of Athens, Shakespeare seems to have maintained a consistent sense of 
its value, roughly equivalent to the exchange rate.
       What  the sum might mean in modern terms is much more diﬃ  cult to 
calculate since calculations based on notions of inﬂ ation are always diﬃ  cult 
as values shifted rapidly at certain periods during Shakespeare’s working life 
and the relational value of individual items of expenditure alters substantially 
between the early modern period and the present. But the income of 3,000 
ducats a year which Sir Andrew Aguecheek received represented a sum wor-
thy of a gentleman (Twelfth Night, 1.3.20). As Wells points out,


       the  salary paid  to  the  Stratford  schoolmaster in Shakespeare’s 
       youth  . . . was £20 a year, very much more than that of any of the 
       wages stipulated by proclamation to be paid  to members of the 
       London  companies in 1587—the highest paid were the brewers at 
       £10 a year.14


       If  we multiply  early values by about 200, it will  serve as a reasonably 
cautious rule of thumb. Don John, in Much Ado About Nothing, pays Borachio 
a thousand ducats for his help in  the plot against Hero  (3.3.105–6) while 
the Courtesan in Th e Comedy of Errors is concerned that ‘forty ducats is too 
much to lose’ (4.3.96). At the time, Don John’s reward would have been worth 
approximately £450 and the Courtesan was worrying about £18; in modern 
terms, the sums would have been approximately £90,000 and £3,600. In Th e 
Merchant of Venice, Antonio is borrowing a sum of about £270,000 to lend to 
Bassanio. Shylock refuses a repayment of £540,000; Portia oﬀ ers extraordi-
nary sums worth between £3.24 million and £5.4 million; Shylock’s diamond 
cost about £180,000 and in one night at Genoa Jessica spent well over £7,200 
on dinner.
       I  think  such estimates of value are signiﬁ cant for our understanding of 
the meaning of the sums quoted: if the sums Portia oﬀ ers seem to us extrava-
gant they are seen in relation to other sums, the sums that belong to Venice 

174
                            The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money                  165


as it were, that  are large  but  not  fantasticated.  Portia’s huge  wealth  does not 
therefore  become a fairy-tale   sum,  even though  it  would   put  her on  any list 
of the  world’s  richest  people. Jessica’s expenditure of £7,200  must  aﬀ ect how 
we evaluate Shylock’s  reaction.  If  a ducat  were worth  considerably   less, then 
Shylock’s horror   at the  expenditure  of  fourscore  in  an evening  would  exem-
plify  his  stinginess. He  could  be accused of  being  not  only  a usurer but  also 
a miser. But  with   these sums in  mind  the  shock  is unsurprising,   almost  rea-
sonable: children,  whether  they  have stolen  the money  from   their  parents or 
not, are  not  supposed to  spend  at ‘such a  noble  rate’. Th is is expenditure   in 
Bassanio’s league. How Shylock  reacts might   be deﬁ ned by our sense of Shy-
lock’s use of his  money, as, for  instance, typiﬁ  ed by two  performances   of the 
role in Stratford.   In 1978,  at Th e Other Place, Patrick  Stewart  played Shylock 
in  a production   directed   by John  Barton.  Th ree years later, Barton   directed 
the  play again,  this  time   with   David  Suchet  as  Shylock.  Both   productions 
were set late:  late  19th  century   for  Stewart,  20th  century   for  Suchet.  Th eir 
readings of  the  role  are  encapsulated  by what   they  smoked.  Suchet  puﬀ ed 
on a  large  fat  cigar. As  he  faced Tubal   across the  table  in  this  scene, both 
smoked large  havanas so that the  conversation  was wreathed  in  cigar smoke. 
He wore  a heavy overcoat and was expensively dressed, looking every inch  the 
wealthy businessman, the  aﬄ  uent director of a multi-national    bank, a modern 
Rothschild  perhaps. Whatever   else may have been true about  this Shylock  he 
clearly had  no qualms  about spending  his money:  being  thrifty   did  not mean 
a refusal to spend anything.  Here,  by contrast,  is Stewart’s own  description   of 
his costume:


        A  shabby black  frock  coat, torn  at the hem  and stained, a waistcoat 
        dusted  with   cigarette  ash,  baggy black   trousers, short   in  the  leg, 
        exposing  down-at-heel    old  boots, and  a collarless  shirt   yellowing 
        with   age.


In  this  production   Antonio    smoked  cheroots,  Tubal  a  havana and  Shylock 
what  Stewart   called   ‘his   mean  little    hand-rolled   cigarettes,   whose   butt-
ends were safely  stored  away for  future   use.’15 For a man  who  was  unwill-
ing  to   spend  anything    on  himself,    for   whom   the  acquisition    of  money 
was everything    and  the   enjoyment   to  be  found   solely  in   the  acquisition 
Jessica’s extravagance must  have been  appalling.   Hence,  too,  his  horror   at 
the  moment  when   he comments,   as much   to  himself   as to  Tubal,   ‘And  I 
know  not  what’s  spent  in  the search’,  and  Tubal  pushes across the  table  to 
him  the  bill   for  his  expenses. As  Stewart   comments  in  his  account  of  the 
performance,  the  bill  ‘included,   in  writing   just too  small  for  the audience  to 
read, a huge  bar  and restaurant   bill  for  two   nights  at  the  Genoa  Hilton’.16 

175
166                                        Peter D. Holland


For the playwright  Arnold  Wesker this was a particularly  infuriating  and 
indeed anti-semitic moment which  occurred in both  Barton’s productions 
(he is actually describing the  1981 version) and was the kind  of moment 
that led to his  own adaptation of the play, variously titled Shylock and The 
Merchant in different states of revision, probably the finest rethinking of  a 
Shakespeare play this century:


       canny old Tubal presents him with a bill. Ho! Ho! Th e audience 
       laughed again to be reminded that not only do Jews suck dry 
       Christian  blood, they suck each other’s as well! Of course! Jews 
       are insensitive to each other’s pain. A debt after all is a debt. Why 
       wait  till grief is past?17


       But  even for a Shylock willing to spend money, like Suchet, the sum of 
fourscore ducats that Jessica spent in a night must have seemed extravagant, 
far beyond even his comfortable life-style. Money has value; it exists in an 
exchange-system which ascribes value to it. Objects can have precise value 
as well. Th e meaning of the loss of diamond may be precisely and adequately 
expressed by its cost; its purchase price of two thousand ducats may be all we 
need to know about it. But we use another term for valuing the valueless or 
invaluable; we talk of objects having ‘sentimental value’ and, if sentimental is 
a word we are wary of, then in this context it may have a precise and deeply 
painful sense. Robbery reminds us of that which cannot be expressed in value, 
of the meanings we attach to objects in ways that insurance companies do 
not comprehend. Rings have an especial potency in this economic system of 
value and its denial. It is striking that in another play in which Shakespeare 
uses a monetary system based on ducats, Cymbeline, here too the problem 
is the value placed on a ring as Posthumus is drawn from prizing or  pric-
ing Imogen and the symbol of her, his ring, at ‘More than the world enjoys’ 
(1.4.77) into accepting that the ring—and hence Imogen—can have precise 
value, the wager with Iachimo of the ring against 10,000 ducats on Imogen’s 
chastity (1.4.125).18 When Portia, after the trial scene, tries to wheedle her 
ring out of Bassanio, he recognizes a distinction between its monetary worth 
and its meaning as a token of love in betrothal as well as an embodiment of 
the transfer of Portia’s father’s wealth to her husband: ‘Th ere’s more depends 
on this than on the value’ (4.1.431) since, earlier, when Portia had transferred 
it to him, she deﬁ ned the full range of its potent meanings:


       Th is house, these servants, and this same myself
       Are  yours, my lord’s. I give them with this ring,
       Which  when you part from, lose, or give away,

176
                         The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money        167


       Let  it presage the ruin of your love
       And  be my vantage to exclaim on you. (3.2.170–4)


Her sense of its future (‘Let it  presage’) is as accurate as Bassanio’s sense of 
his fortunate journey  to Belmont:  ‘I  have a mind presages me such thrift’ 
(1.1.175). The ring signifies a transfer of wealth, of status, of love and, not 
least important, of Portia herself, a woman trapped, through the exchange 
processes of patriarchy, in the transition between father and husband, res-
cued, by Bassanio’s choice of casket, from the limbo of being unattached to 
any man except the ‘will  of a dead father’ (1.2.24). Hence, confronted  by 
Portia’s, or rather ‘Balthasar’s’, pressing request, Bassanio offers instead ‘The 
dearest ring in Venice will  I  give you, /  And  find  it  out by proclamation’ 
(4.1.432–3). Money, here, is no object; he will spend anything but not pass 
over the ring. That he does so is in part to accede to Antonio’s request in a 
precise expression of the relative value of two sides of Bassanio’s life:


       My  Lord  Bassanio, let him have the ring.
       Let  his deservings and my love withal
       Be valued ‘gainst your wife’s commandëment. (446–8)


Antonio carefully balances the deservings and love on the one hand and the 
orders of a wife on the other, a deliberately unequal equation.
       At   the climax of  the trial  scene, just as he is about to face Shylock’s 
knife, Antonio had pointedly linked his farewell to his intrusion in Bassanio’s 
relationship to Portia:


       Commend me to your honourable wife.
       Tell  her the process of Antonio’s end.
       Say how I loved you . . . (270–2)


The rhythm  of the last line is tricky:  is it an iambic instruction  to describe 
the manner of the  love (‘Say how I  loved you’) or a  non-iambic, trochaic 
emphasis that he should speak of Antonio’s love for Bassanio rather than 
hers (‘Say how I loved you’)? Bassanio defines his response in terms of a 
theory of  valueless value, an attitude to value that goes beyond anything 
that can be valued, something outside the exchange systems by which value 
is defined:


       Antonio,  I am married to a wife
       Which  is as dear to me as life itself,
       But  life itself, my wife, and all the world

177
168                                        Peter D. Holland


       Are  not with me esteemed above thy life.
       I  would lose all, ay, sacriﬁ ce them all
       Here to  this devil, to deliver you. (279–84)


Portia’s list of the wealth embodied in the ring is precise and meaningful in 
a structure of exchange: ‘This house, these servants, and this same myself’. 
Bassanio’s is not. No wonder that Portia’s response is a wry comment—usu-
ally, though for me unnecessarily—marked by editors as an aside:


       Your wife would give you little thanks for that,
       If  she were by to hear you make the oﬀ er. (285–6)


       Th e value Bassanio or Antonio might place on their relationship—how-
ever we read the degree of active homoerotic desire on either part between 
them—is one that could threaten Bassanio’s marriage to Portia. In the eccen-
tric and intriguing production by the American director Peter Sellars for the 
Goodman Th eatre in Chicago in 1994, Portia did not at the end of the play 
hand over to Antonio a sealed letter announcing the safe return of three argo-
sies—a moment of blatant artiﬁ ce underlined by her comment ‘You shall not 
know by what strange accident / I chancèd on this letter’ (5.1.278–9). Instead 
she calmly wrote him out a large cheque, a clear indication that he should get 
out of her husband’s life and stay out.
       In  a monetary system objects can be placed beyond value and that leads 
back, ﬁ nally, to Jessica’s theft of Shylock’s ring. Shylock’s distress at the loss 
of the turquoise has nothing to do with its monetary value. He does not price 
it. Instead he gives it a history, places it in relation to his life. Patrick Stew-
art described it as a ‘simple gift, possibly a betrothal ring, from a woman to 
her lover’.19 I would remove the hesitation over ‘possibly’. Th e ring deﬁ nes 
Shylock’s wife’s love for him and hence, in the value he attaches to it, his love 
for his wife. For Stewart much is contained in that word ‘bachelor’:


       Th at word shatters our image of this man Shylock and we see the 
       man  that once was, a bachelor, . . . Shakespeare doesn’t need to 
       write  a prehistory of Shylock. Th ose two lines say it all.


It is striking  how  this lost youth  points to the overwhelming  sense of loss 
that surrounds Shylock. Leah, like many Shakespearean wives and mothers 
is invisible, unseen and largely unknown but it is difficult to hear in Shylock’s 
lines anything other than love and pain, the two emotions captured together 
in the  ‘wilderness’, the arid world  inhabited only  by chattering  monkeys, 

178
                            The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money                  169


those symbols  of lust.  Jessica’s pet seems a peculiarly cruel  substitute  for  the 
ring  and  the substitution    itself,  the  choice  of selling   that  ring,  is  a mark  of 
her cruelty.  For it  is surely  unlikely  that  Jessica did not  know  the meaning   of 
that  ring,  the  token  of betrothal,   the  link  between  her  parents.
        I  do  not  want  to  be  reading  too  obsessively realistically   but  her act  of 
theft  is an act of vengeance, a response to the hell  she ﬁ nds her father’s house 
to be. Much   will  depend  on  how  the relationship   between  Shylock  and  Jes-
sica is played  in their   scene together  but  Henry   Irving,  in  his  production   in 
1879, added  a silent  scene which  epitomized   what  the  loss of  Jessica meant 
for Shylock.  After  an extravagant  playing  of her  escape, complete with  a gon-
dola propelled   across the  stage, the  curtain   dropped  quickly   and  then  rose 
again. Th e sound was heard of Shylock’s  walking   stick; he  entered carrying  a 
lantern  and crossed the bridge  over  the canal. He  knocked   at the door  of  his 
house three times, for, it  is worth  remembering,  he has trusted  Jessica with his 
keys and he has no means of access to his own  house without   them  (Elizabe-
than  houses did  not  have spare sets of keys). Th e lack  of response disturbed 
him  and he knocked  again. Th en a look  of dumb  and  complete  despair came 
over his  face. Ellen   Terry,  who  played  Portia  in  the  production,   wrote   that 
‘[f ]or  absolute  pathos, achieved by  absolute simplicity    of means, I  never saw 
anything  in  the theatre  to compare  with’  it.20
        Jessica exchanges her father  for  a husband, Lorenzo.  Rather  than  being 
passed from  one  male  hand  to another   she chooses to  control   her  own  act 
of betrothal   mobility.  Perhaps  she deserves her Lorenzo,  the  man  who,  after 
Jessica has praised Portia  to the  skies, can only  respond  by  praising  himself: 
‘Even such a husband /  Hast thou  of  me as she is for a wife’ (3.5.78–9), a curi-
ously tasteless piece of Venetian male arrogance. In the circulation   of exchange 
in the  play, the  structures of  value, Jessica makes a very speciﬁ c intervention, 
claiming  the kind  of right  that  is not available to Portia  or at least which  Portia 
chooses not to accept as being within  her control.  Jessica controls the meaning 
and value of her acts, but, like the eﬀ ect of her conversion on the  price of bacon 
(in  Lancelot  Gobbo’s  account), the  implications   start  to spin  out  beyond  her 
control  into  the  forms  of  social organization   dependent  on a ﬁ scal economy. 
As, by the end of Act  4, the Jews vanish from  the play, so only the ambivalence 
of Jessica is left,  unclear  whether   she is Jew  or Christian,   left   in  a religious 
limbo  of damnation,  a token  whose value  is increasingly  uncertain  and whose 
position  in the  play is increasingly one  of silence. By the end it  is Portia  who is 
controlling   the activity,  the play’s ﬁ nal ring-master,  until,   that  is, even she has 
to cede control   back to  the  male  view of  female  behaviour, a  context  within 
which  rings  no longer  signify  a  value of ducats  or a  value beyond  ducats but 
simply a value of  sexual possession and male fear.

179
170                                             Peter D. Holland


                                                         Notes

          1. All  quotations from Shakespeare are taken from William Shakespeare, The 
Complete Works, eds. Stanley Wells, Gary Taylor et al. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1986), unless otherwise stated.
          2. See Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor  et al., William  Shakespeare: A Textual 
Companion (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987), p. 504.
          3.  Other explanations include the  differing  value of  the talent in  Plutarch 
and Lucian, the main sources for Timon of Athens. See T. J. B. Spencer, ‘Shakespeare 
learns the value of money’, Shakespeare Survey 6 (1953) pp. 75–8, the article that 
provided my title; Wells and Taylor, Textual Companion pp. 501–02; see also Rich-
ard Proudfoot, ‘Shakespeare’s Coinage’ in M. T.  Jones-Davies, ed., Shakespeare et 
l’argent (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1993 [Actes du Congrès, 1992, Société Française 
Shakespeare]), pp. 101–15.
          4.  On ducats in  this  play see also Stanley Wells, ‘Money in  Shakespeare’s 
comedies’, in M.  T.  Jones-Davies, ed., Shakespeare et l’argent, pp. 161–71. Much 
recent criticism of  the play has explored exchange processes in the play (see, e.g., 
Karen Newman, ‘Portia’s Ring: Unruly Women and Structures of Exchange in The 
Merchant of Venice,’ Shakespeare Quarterly 38 (1987), pp. 19–33), but no-one seems to 
have been especially interested in the ducats themselves.
          5.  On  the statute,  see Norman Jones, God and the Moneylenders (Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell, 1989); for a more general study of early modern attitudes to usury, 
see Sandra K. Fischer, Econolingua: A Glossary of Coins and Economic Language in 
Renaissance Drama (Newark, Del.: University of Delaware Press, 1985), appendix 
A, pp. 138–51.
          6.  It  is, incidentally,  an unnoticed characteristic of  the exchange practices 
across classes of this play that Portia simply takes away her servant’s name when 
choosing one for her disguise: she sends her Balthasar on a journey from Belmont 
to Padua to Venice and then  when he arrives in  Venice with  the ‘notes and gar-
ments’ provided by Bellario he will  somehow become unnamed as Portia takes on 
his identity.
          7.  William   Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, ed. Jay Halio  (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1994) p. 227.
          8.  Fischer, p.  69. Fischer’s analysis of usury  also suggests a meaning for 
Shylock’s accusation that Antonio ‘was wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy’ 
(3.1.45–6) that editors have never annotated, to my knowledge. Edward I’s procla-
mation of 1290, one of the crucial  steps leading to the expulsion of the Jews from 
England, complains that  the Jews had ‘maliciously’ invented a new kind  of usury 
known  as ‘courtesy’, usually understood to mean an  extra-contractual obligation 
to pay a fee or a gift for  the loan of the  money, thereby evading statutory controls 
on usury since, the ‘courtesy’ being non-contractual, ‘it was beyond the law in both 
enforcement and punishment’ (p. 143). Shylock is therefore complaining about the 
kind of courtesy that Antonio  uses in his loans: a loan without interest, seeking, at 
most, gratitude in return.
          9. Fischer, p. 69 and p. 152.
        10.  See Frederic C. Lane and  Reinhold C.  Mueller,  Money and Banking in 
Medieval and Renaissance Venice, vol. 2, The Venetian Money Market (Baltimore, MD: 
The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997), pp. 327–37.
        11. Ibid.,  pp. 345–53.

180
                            The Merchant of Venice and the Value of Money                  171


        12. Ibid.,  p. 355.
        13. It is also referred to in Two Gentlemen of Ve ro na, Romeo and Juliet, Much Ado 
About Nothing, Measure for Measure and The Taming of the Shrew.
        14. Wells, ‘Money in Shakespeare’s Comedies’, p. 168, quoting Fischer, p. 153. 
The figure  for brewers included ‘meat and drink’; by comparison, goldsmiths were 
to be paid £8 a year ‘with meat and drink’ but 6s a week (= £15.12s a year) ‘without 
meat and drink’ (Fischer, p. 154).
        15. See Patrick Stewart, ‘Shylock’ in Philip  Brockbank,  ed., Players of Shake-
speare (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), p. 18, and see also John 
Barton, Playing Shakespeare (London: Methuen, 1984), chapter 10, ‘Exploring   a 
Character: Playing Shylock’, pp. 169–80.
        16. Stewart, p. 23.
        17. Arnold  Wesker, The Merchant, (London: Methuen, 1983), p. lii
        18. Wells  comments of the colossal sum Iachimo wagers that it ‘should seem 
breathtaking in its  self-confidence’ (Wells, ‘Money in  Shakespeare’s Comedies’, p. 
169).
        19. Stewart, p. 23.
        20. See Ellen Terry, Ellen Terry’s Memoirs, ed. Edith Craig and Christopher St. 
John (London: Victor Gollancz Ltd,  1933), p. 146.

182
                                  Grace        Tiffany


                            Law    and   Self-Interest      in  
                           The   Merchant       of   Venice




Shakespearean comedy is notable for the blitheness with which, in some 
latter acts, rulers overturn laws they have previously described as inexorable. 
in the first scene of A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Duke Theseus tells the 
hapless Hermia she must acquiesce in her father’s choice of husband for her, 
enter a nunnery, or die, since the athenian law that gives egeus the right 
to dispose of his daughter is one that the duke “by no means [ . . . ] may 
extenuate” (1.1.120).1 yet in act four Theseus discovers a means to change 
the law. He can simply do it. encountering Hermia and Lysander outside 

“ the athenian wood, the duke overrides the complaint of egeus—who 
 beg[s] the law, the law, upon [the] head” of Lysander for stealing his daugh-
ter—announcing, “egeus, i will overbear your will” (4.1.155, 179). a similar 
reversal occurs in The Comedy of Errors. There the Duke of ephesus initially 
tells the captive merchant egeon that though he “may pity” he may “not 
pardon” him for his illegal entry into ephesus, a city at war with egeon’s 
city, Syracuse (1.1.97). egeon must die unless someone buys his release. yet 
in act five, the Duke waves away the bag of ducats egeon’s son tries to hand 
him as “pawn” for his father, saying breezily, “it shall not need; thy father 
hath his life” (5.1.390). audiences never question the late-term rule-changes 
in these plays, since their causes are manifest in the comedies’ conclusions. 
as romantic (rather than satiric humors) comedies, these plays’ final scenes 


from Papers on Language and Literature 42, no. 4 (fall 2006): 384–400. copyright © 2006 
by the Board of Trustees, Southern illinois University at edwardsville.


                                                  173

183
174                                          Grace Tiffany


are consecrated to celebrations of love, not  law:  family  reunion, marital 
reconciliation, and above all erotic harmony. When  facing the miraculous 
finding  of lost relatives and amazing tales of spiritually restorative magical 
events, civic law may properly bow.
       What  I  want to explore is the diminishment of romantic-comic fulﬁ ll-
ment in a play in which law does not bow to love: where, in fact, the reverse 
occurs, and love conforms to law. Th e Merchant of Venice violates Shakespear-
ean comic convention, by which eros nulliﬁ es or overrides rules. In Th e Tam-
ing of the Shrew, the law that makes it “death for anyone in Mantua / To come 
to Padua” is only a hoax Tranio invents to get a Mantuan to don disguise and 
help in a  wooing scheme (4.2.81–82). In Love’s Labor’s Lost, the Navarran 
king’s rules against men’s fraternization with ladies do not survive the play’s 
ﬁ rst scene. Even the contorted and troublesome conclusion of Measure for 
Measure depends, for its various marital pairings and formal reconciliations, 
on Duke Vincentio’s pardoning of the play’s sexual criminals, Angelo, Claudio, 
Lucio, and Juliet. Only in Th e Merchant of Venice are conﬂ icts resolved through 
adherence to law rather than by law’s suspension. Th us the comedy aﬀ ords 
no romantic release from law’s domain into the realm of love, where private 
selves are generously sacriﬁ ced to a larger, shared identity. Instead, the play 
proposes a generosity and sacriﬁ ce tempered by underlying rules that limit 
and curb those qualities and that ensure private selves and private property 
are kept safe. Put another way, since rules and laws in Th e Merchant of Venice 
concern the contractual safeguarding of things, their sway has an anti-comic 
because anti-erotic eﬀ ect. Th e Merchant of Venice celebrates not characters’ 
warm embrace of mutual identity, as in marriage, but their cold preservation 
or augmentation of what they  legally own. (Certainly Shakespeare derived 
some skepticism regarding love’s power to nullify self-interestedness from 
Marlowe’s Th e Jew of Malta, a play wherein the “wind that bloweth all the 
world” is not eros but “[d]esire of gold” [Th e Jew of Malta 3.5.3–4].) Th us Th e 
Merchant of Venice dramatizes the sobering inﬂ uence of a mercantile ethic, 
enshrined in law, on a romantic-comic economy.
       Contractual laws, or rules, designed to keep property safe hold sway in 
Th e Merchant of Venice despite its Christians’ protestations of absolute gener-
osity. Th roughout the comedy not only enemies, like Shylock and Antonio, 
but lovers and friends hedge their commitments to one another with rules, 
charges, directions, and laws safeguarding their interests. Th ings are not given, 
but loaned. Debts are incurred and are not  dismissed. “To you, Antonio,” 
Bassanio says in the play’s ﬁ rst scene, “I owe the most in money and in love” 
(1.1.130–131). Bassanio’s statement is not merely a poetic description of an 
emotional debt, but a literal account of a real ﬁ nancial problem in whose light 
the play’s romantic plot will be launched. Bassanio owes Antonio money as 

184
                           Law and Self-Interest in The Merchant of Venice       175


well as love, and must repay it. His decision to woo Portia is thus seen to arise 
not from erotic impulse (as do, for example, Claudio’s pursuit of Hero in Much 
Ado about Nothing, Lysander’s of Hermia in A Midsummer Night’s Dream, and 
Syracusan Antipholus’s of Luciana in Th e Comedy of Errors). Bassanio’s plan 
is instead a scheme “to get clear of all the debts [he] owe[s]” (1.1.133–134). 
Portia’s eroticism is similarly chilled by the care with which she provides for 
her own interests while ostensibly surrendering them to Bassanio. Once he 
has won her, she eloquently pledges her house, servants, and self to him “with 
this ring,” but provides a caveat that entitles her to revoke all gifts if he breaks 
the rules that govern the ring’s disposition. Such violation of the rules will 
give her “vantage”—a ﬁ nancial term meaning “proﬁ t”—to “exclaim on,” or 
legally arraign, Bassanio for the breach (3.2.170–174).2 Presumably when 
that happens, all bets will be oﬀ .
       Even  the  generous Antonio,  like  Portia,  hedges his kindness with 
caveats. “My purse, my person, my extremest means / Lie all unlocked to 
your occasions,” he tells Bassanio in the play’s ﬁ rst scene (1.1.138–139). But 
subsequent scenes disclose that that purse and person have their price. In 
an exercise of what Barbara Correll has called “emotional usury”3—or, to 
quote Timon of Athens, “usuring kindness” (4.3.509)—Antonio will promise 
to clear Bassanio’s debt to him “if [he] might  but see [him]  at [his]  death” 
(3.2.319–320), and when Bassanio comes to witness, in the Venetian court-
room, what he thinks will be Antonio’s death, he is charged with nurturing 
and promoting Antonio’s  claim on his  own heart. “Commend me to  your 
honorable wife,” Antonio instructs him then,


        Tell her the process of Antonio’s end,
        Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death;
        And when the tale is told, bid her be judge
        Whether Bassanio had not once a love. (4.1.273–277)


After the courtroom scene, Antonio further demands that Bassanio demon-
strate that he values Antonio’s love more than Bassanio’s “wife’s commande-
ment” that he safeguard her ring (4.1.449–451). The language of loan, not 
of gift, marks Antonio’s speech, as in his final description, in the play’s last 
scene, of his prior transaction with Bassanio: “I once did lend my body for 
his wealth” (5.1.249). He does not say “I once did give my body for his love.” 
Sylvan Barnet, editor of the Signet edition of this play, strives in a footnote 
to soften this crass reminder of the money relations among our heroes Por-
tia, Bassanio, and Antonio, glossing “wealth” as “welfare” (“I once did lend 
my body for his welfare” [n249, 98]). But Shakespeare wrote “wealth.” Out 
of that wealth, we remember, was to come repayment of Bassanio’s original 

185
176                                          Grace Tiffany


debt to Antonio.  So Antonio’s diction  is apt. It  reminds us that this play’s 
plots have not been impelled by an impulse toward wild erotic self-surrender 
but by the regulated claims of property. The Merchant of Venice’s celebrated 
darkness has much to do with the fact that in it, rules and laws concerning 
private ownership are never forgotten or departed from either in Belmont or 
in Venice, but instead preserved obsessively, even absurdly, to the very letter, 
by others besides Shylock.
       It  is not that  the Venetians do not love, but that love—an impulse and 
commitment that upholds a shared rather than a private identity—is not the 
prime motivator of their actions. Many scholars have observed that among all 
this play’s characters, money and emotional interests are inextricably mixed.4 
True to his promise—“we will  resemble you” (3.1.68)—Shylock is like the 
Christians in his intermingling of private emotional and ﬁ nancial claims. He 
likes proﬁ t, but his chief charge against Antonio ﬁ nally has little to do with 
money; he turns down twice the number of ducats Bassanio owes him because 
he has paid a higher emotional price for Antonio’s ﬂ esh (it is “dearly bought, 
is mine, and I  will  have it,” he threatens [4.1.100]). Both in  soliloquy and 
conversation with Tubal, he has framed his desire to kill Antonio as a busi-
ness decision (“were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will” 
[3.1.127–129]). But the  scene in which his anguished reaction to Jessica’s 
elopement is interwoven with his glee at Antonio’s business losses shows a 
more complicated self-concern. Th at a Christian has invaded Shylock’s family 
justiﬁ es his radical reach for ﬁ nancial security through harming a Christian, 
he seems to conclude.
       As for Jessica, her love for Lorenzo is bound to the social advantage she 
imagines she will acquire by marrying him.5 “[A]shamed to be [her] father’s 
child,” she will “end this strife” by “[b]ecom[ing] a Christian and [Lorenzo’s] 
loving wife” (2.3.17, 20–21). Lorenzo’s love for Jessica is expressed in terms 
that suggest his similarly mixed motives of love and private acquisitiveness. 
“She hath directed / How I shall take her from her father’s house, / What gold 
and jewels she is furnished with” (2.4.29–31).6 Although Jessica and Lorenzo 
break the law, stealing from Shylock to pad their pockets, their thievery is 
oddly validated by law in act four. After Shylock’s claims on Antonio’s person 
are thwarted in court, the Duke requires Shylock to “record a gift / Here in 
the court of all he dies possessed / Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter” 
(4.1.388–390). Th is ruling both safeguards Shylock’s property, or a portion of 
it, during his life and preserves Jessica’s portion, implicitly and retrospectively 
reframing the theft  of money and jewels as a lawful activity. Shylock must 
legally will his possessions to “the gentleman / Th at lately stole his daughter” 
(4.1.384–385). Here again, law is not suspended but called into service to 
support, not love, but ﬁ nancial security. For the apparently broke Lorenzo 

186
                           Law and Self-Interest in The Merchant of Venice       177


and Jessica, who have squandered their cash and jewels at the gaming tables 
of Genoa, this contractual promise of ﬁ nancial support will be “manna” for 
“starved people” (5.1.294–295).
       Superﬁ cially, Portia appears radically to contrast with those in the play 
who, like Shylock, want what is legally theirs. Th e apparent possessor of limit-
less wealth, she oﬀ ers it all to Bassanio: “Myself, and what is mine, to you and 
yours/ Is now converted,” she tells him.


       But  now I was the lord
       Of  this fair mansion, master of my servants,
       Queen o’er myself, and even now, but now,
       Th is house, these servants, and this same myself
       Are  yours. [ . . . ] (3.2.166–171)


Yet, as I, and other  scholars, have noted, Portia hedges her promise with 
stipulations regarding the safeguarding of a ring,  then works against that 
ring’s safeguarding by encouraging Bassanio to give it away, and in the play’s 
last scene re-presents the ring to him without renewing her generous pledge 
of house, servants, and self. “[B]id him keep it  better than the  other,” she 
says briefly, to Antonio,  the second time (5.1.255). She reminds Bassanio 
that to secure his gain in her, he must conform to the rules with which she 
regulates that gain.7 Bassanio and his follower Gratiano are the  “Jasons”; 
they have “won the Fleece” (3.2.241). Still, audiences may know that Jason 
lost everything in the end for not respecting the rights of his wife.
       Portia’s ﬁ nal contract with Bassanio is the last expression of a propri-
etary attitude she has demonstrated throughout the play. Her concern to keep 
what she owns is implied early by her anti-comic insistence on honoring her 
father’s will. Portia’s free choice of a husband is not hampered by an angry 
Egeus or even a benign Baptista, but by a piece of paper that pledges her 
material estate to the suitor who wins the casket game. “[S]o is the will of a 
living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father” (1.2.24–25), she sighs. Th at 
Portia abides by her father’s will indicates that she—a woman as unromantic 
as are Bassanio and Lorenzo—is not willing both to  marry and be penni-
less. Superﬁ cially her words to Bassanio upon his arrival in Belmont express 
self-abandonment in pursuit of the larger self found in erotic relationship, yet 
they also imply the same frustrated desire for control of property—including 
control over herself—that she has expressed in the play’s ﬁ rst scene. “One 
half of me is yours, the other half yours,” she tells her suitor. “Mine own, I 
would say; but if mine, then yours, / And so all yours! O these naughty times 
/ Puts bars between the owners and their rights” (3.2.16–19). But Portia ﬁ nds 
a means to squeeze between those bars. No less committed than Shylock to 

187
178                                          Grace Tiffany


the rules, she works within them to achieve not only the husband of her desire 
but the mastery of her fortune and her  fortunes. While numerous scholars 
have suggested that Portia cheats and helps Bassanio win the wooing game,8 
she does not cheat but hints, thus upholding the letter if not the spirit of her 
father’s law. Portia ensures that while Bassanio makes his choice, he is sung a 
song whose ﬁ rst three lines rhyme with the word “lead,” the metal of which 
the right casket is made (3.2.63–65). Doubtless Portia stands by, supplying 
the “fair speechless messages” her eyes are wont to give Bassanio, as he has 
earlier bragged to Antonio (1.1.163–166). Th us she ensures his victory with-
out breaking the rules.
       Once  he  has won, despite her  words of  absolute committal  of  her 
wealth and person, she never stops exercising proprietary rights over her stuﬀ , 
which now includes Bassanio, as Corinne Abate (292) and Sandra Logan 
have noted. It is Portia, not Bassanio, who oﬀ ers money to redeem Antonio 
once the message concerning his wreck is brought (3.2.299). Even after their 
hasty marriage, she goes where she pleases and refers to her servants as “My 
people” (3.4.37). Bassanio may return to Venice after he obeys her instruc-
tions, which are, “First go with  me  to church and call  me wife” (3.2.304). 
“By your leave, / I bid my very friends and countrymen, / Sweet Portia, wel-
come,” Bassanio says meekly when his friends arrive from Venice (3.2.222–
224; my emphasis). At the play’s end, it is again Portia who dispenses gifts, 
including—mysteriously—the news that some of Antonio’s ships have come 
safely to port (5.1.276–277). Her dispensation of the wealth underscores her 
commitment to controlling  it. In  Portia, as in Antonio, generosity co-exists 
with a ﬁ rm insistence on private holdings.
       “Commodity”  is a word for the anti-erotic interest in private rights that 
Portia subtly and other Merchant characters overtly exhibit. Th e most famous 
Shakespearean reference to “commodity” occurs in King John, when the Bas-
tard calls political commodity the “bawd,” “broker,” and “bias of the world” 
(2.1.582, 574). In Merchant, written perhaps the same year as King John (i.e., 
1595), Shakespeare shows a fascination with the claims of commodity in a 
ﬁ nancial context. In Venice, known to Elizabethans as a thriving commercial 
center, citizens’ own ﬁ scal suﬃ  ciency depends on the city’s protection of the 
private interests of oﬃ  cial “strangers” like Shylock. It is ironically Antonio, the 
generous lender who stands to suﬀ er most from law’s demands, who insists 
on upholding Venetian law to preserve “commodity.” Th e “play’s committed 
legalist,” in Samuel Ajzenstat’s phrase, Antonio “considers the commercial 
law of Venice untouchable” (272). He willingly submits to the bond by which 
he must yield his own life to Shylock because the law safeguarding property 
interests—the law by which he himself lives—demands it. “Th e duke cannot 
deny the course of law,” he tells Solanio,

188
                           Law and Self-Interest in The Merchant of Venice       179


       For the commodity that strangers have
       With   us in Venice, if it be denied,
       Will   much impeach the justice of the state,
       Since that the trade and proﬁ t of the city
       Consisteth of all nations. (3.3.26–31)


As Janet Adelman writes,  Antonio’s  speech “implies a political  economy 
in which  states exist to insure trade conditions among ‘nations’ conceived 
as political and economic units” (21). This politico-economic context gives 
meaning to his life.  His  subsequent words in court suggest that if he can 
no longer function  within   that  context, he is  better off  dead. Therefore, 
though the enforcement of contract law in  this case threatens to kill him, 
he welcomes the law because as a “bankrout” (4.1.122)—and the apparent 
loser in a contest for Bassanio’s heart—he has nothing for which to live. In 
providing a legal means by which he may die, Fortune “shows herself [ . . . ] 
kind” to Antonio.  Not only will  she allow him to secure a posthumous claim 
to Bassanio’s affections by dying for him, she will also not make him “outlive 
his wealth” (4.1.267, 269) in a city where not only Shylock but other, possibly 
Gentile, “creditors grow cruel” (3.2.316).
       Antonio  here aligns Fortune with  law. Th ough Portia will prove more 
powerful than Fortune and  will  avert the fate that  Antonio  thinks dooms 
him, still, she will not—like the dukes of A Midsummer Night’s Dream and Th e 
Comedy of Errors—overturn law. In fact, she, like Antonio himself, explicitly 
forbids the Duke to subvert the law in a conventional comic manner. Antonio 
has told Solanio that the “Duke cannot deny the course of law” in Antonio’s 
case without alienating “strangers” on whom commerce depends. But this 
caveat is a caveat only. Th e Duke can deny the course of law if he is willing to 
put what we would call human rights above property rights. And in fact, the 
Duke seems ready to do this. “Upon my power I may dismiss this court,” he 
says, after failing to elicit from Shylock voluntary mercy, “Unless Bellario, a 
learned doctor / Whom I have sent for to determine this / Come here today” 
(4.1.104–107). Bellario sends Balthazar, or Portia in disguise, who thus seems 
summoned as Shylock’s advocate rather than Antonio’s. Portia is brought to 
“stand [ . . . ] for law” like Shylock (4.1.142), and stand for law—the contract 
which secures Shylock’s property rights—is exactly what she ﬁ nally does. 
As she questions Shylock, Bassanio appeals to the higher authority of the 
Duke, begging him, “Wrest the law to your authority” (4.1.215). Before the 
Duke can answer, Portia stops him. “It must not  be” (4.1.218). She claims 
that “Th ere is no power in Venice / Can alter a decree established,” but her 
next lines suggest that this claim is more an argument regarding the wisdom 
of overriding the  law than a  statement of fact. If  the Duke  does kick the 

189
180                                          Grace Tiffany


case out of court, “’Twill be recorded for a precedent / And many an error by 
the same example / Will rush into the state” (4.1.218–222). A proper comic 
duke’s response would be “Who cares? Court adjourned, forever.” But this 
duke silently aﬃ  rms Portia’s anti-comic insistence that the commodity of 
strangers outweigh kindness.
       Th at the  legal commodity  of  strangers is distinct  from  kindness to 
strangers becomes plain when we examine strangers’ treatment in both Venice 
and Belmont. Both realms are structured by adherence to laws that safeguard 
the commodities of residents and strangers who form complex networks of 
mutual social and ﬁ nancial obligations. Portia’s world is thus in one sense a 
mirror of the Venice she penetrates.9 In it, strangers are allowed to compete 
in a wooing contest because a legal document requires their admission to the 
game, but their welcome is severely qualiﬁ ed. Her father’s rules demand that 
Portia open her doors to a Neapolitan, an Englishman, a Spaniard, a French-
man, a Scotsman, a German, and a Moroccan, but she makes clear to Nerissa 
and to the audience that she does not like any of them (1.2).10 Her warm 
welcome is saved for the “young Venetian,” Bassanio (2.9.87, 3.2). In Venice, 
in its turn, commercial imperatives obligate the Duke to uphold “stranger cur” 
(1.3.118) Shylock’s contract rather than to overturn it in comic mercy, but—
deferring to Portia—the Duke honors legal claims rather than the claims of 
human kindness for Shylock as well as for Antonio. Th us the Duke allows 
Portia an absurdly literalist reading of the bond that prevents its execution 
and violates its spirit. Shylock may take a pound of ﬂ esh, but no blood, and 
may not let the ﬂ esh’s weight exceed one pound by “the twenti[e]th part / Of 
one poor scruple” (4.1.325, 329–330), a stipulation whose exactness would 
put an end to all commerce if generally enforced. In addition, once Shylock 
has forsworn the bond, the Duke sits by as she unnecessarily invokes an anti-
alien law that threatens to kill Shylock.
       Shylock, of course, has asked for all this by assuming a literalist as well 
as a legalist stance with regard to the bond. Having introduced the contract 
as a joke—“a merry sport” (1.3.145)—he clings in court  to its  cruel letter. 
Shylock stands generally opposed to verbal ﬁ gures that break the boundar-
ies of the literal. (As Anne Barton has said, he is “distrustful of metaphor or 
ﬁ gurative language” [251].) “You call me [ . . . ] cutthroat dog,” he has told 
Antonio. “Hath a dog money?” (1.3.111, 121). Th ere is, then, some comic jus-
tice in Portia’s demonstration to Shylock of the limits of literalism in law. Yet 
the play’s critique of literalism is chastened by the self-serving uses to which 
Portia and the other Christians put metaphor. Antonio’s calling Shylock “cur-
rish” and “wolvish” (4.1.133, 138) is partly justiﬁ ed by his rage at Shylock’s 
cruel treatment of his creditors (“I oft delivered from his forfeitures / Many 
that have at times made moan to me,” Antonio says [3.3.22–23]). Th ough the 

190
                              Law and Self-Interest in The Merchant of Venice                181


canine metaphors  are harsh, in Antonio    they are at least partly  aligned  with  a 
generous purpose. Not  so for  Bassanio, whose extravagant  poetic  description 
of himself  as Jason in quest of  the golden  ﬂ eece is a mere pretty mask  for the 
plain ﬁ nancial need  that sends him  to Belmont,   to woo “a lady  richly  left,” the 
phrase that  ﬁ rst leaps to  his lips  as a description   of Portia  (1.1.161).   Portia’s 
elaborate verbal gift  of herself  to Bassanio is, as we have seen, a deceptive con-
ceit undercut  by rules limiting    that gift,  as well as by her subsequent behavior, 
which  demonstrates  her  continued  autonomy.  Finally,  in  the  courtroom,   the 
kindness oﬀ ered to strangers  itself becomes a word-screen  behind  which   pri-
vate interests may  be preserved.
        We   see this   faux  kindness  in   Portia’s  insistence  that   mercy  towards 
Antonio    be not   mandated  by  the   Duke   but  freely   embraced  by  Shylock. 
When  Shylock  refuses, he is granted his  bond under  terms  that guarantee  his 
own decision  not  to  enforce it.  Likewise,   Shylock’s conversion  is not,  strictly 
speaking, “coerced,” as it  is  generally  called, but  formally   chosen  as a means 
of  safeguarding  his  wealth.11 His   choice  to  convert  comes  on  the  heels of 
Antonio’s   proposed  modiﬁ cation   of  the  Duke’s  decision  to  spare Shylock’s 
life,  leave him   half  his  wealth  minus   a ﬁ ne, and  give  the  other  half  of  his 
money to  Antonio.   Antonio   interjects,


        So  please my lord  the Duke   and all  the court
        To  quit  the  ﬁ ne for one half  of  his goods,
        I  am content;  so he  will  let  me have
        Th e other  half in  use, to render  it
        Upon   his death  unto the  gentleman
        Th at lately  stole his  daughter.
        Two  things  provided  more:  that  for  this favor
        He  presently  become a Christian;
        Th e other, that  he do  record a gift
        Here  in  the  court of  all  he dies possessed
        Unto   his son Lorenzo   and his  daughter. (4.1.380–390)


Antonio’s  bizarre  proposition  subverts Christ’s   instruction   that to  become his 
follower  a rich  man must  “sell that  [he]  ha[th],  and  give it  to the  poor”  (Mat-
thew 19:21,  Geneva). According   to Antonio’s   caveat, Shylock  will  give  up all 
he owns only  if  he doesn’t formally  follow  Christ.   Shakespeare here imagina-
tively  reverses the popularly  believed-in  Venetian  civic  custom  of  appropriat-
ing  the  goods of  Jewish  converts.  (“All   their  goods  are confiscated   as soon 
as they embrace  Christianity,”    Thomas  Coryate  wrote   of the  Jews in  1610.) 
Conversion  to Christianity    is  now, to  the contrary,  the  only  means by which 
Shylock may keep some of his goods during  life.  Conversion  on these terms is, 

191
182                                          Grace Tiffany


of course, a mockery of faith, but it is one framed by the Venetians in terms 
that support the  play’s overriding concern with the preservation of private 
property. Formally, if bitterly, accepting the proposal in order to stay in busi-
ness—“I am content,” Shylock says (4.1.394)—Shylock is merely participating 
in the anti-comic economy of property interests that structures the play.
       Nor  is Antonio selﬂ ess here. While several scholars have suggested that in 
the lines quoted above Antonio is proposing only to administer the half of Shy-
lock’s estate granted him “on Shylock’s behalf,”12 the sense of his words is surely 
otherwise. Superﬁ cially, the lines are confusing. Antonio says he is “content” for 
the Duke to remit a ﬁ ne for Shylock and allow Shylock free use of half his own 
goods if Shylock “will let me have the other half in use.” However, the ﬁ rst part 
of that statement is “precatory”—it has no legal bearing on the judgment just 
pronounced—and the second part is redundant. Antonio “has no power over, 
nor any interest in,” the half of Shylock’s wealth that was due the state before 
the Duke reduced that penalty, as Richard Weisberg says (15),13 and as for the 
other half, he has already been granted it (and only it). He does not need to 
bargain for half of Shylock’s wealth “in use.” So what does he mean?
       Joan Ozark Holmer  argues that Antonio here pledges himself only to 
employ the interest, or “use,” on Shylock’s goods, and not to “touch the prin-
cipal,” but if  this is so we see Antonio  suddenly agreeing to proﬁ t from a 
business practice he has heretofore hated.14 Th e more likely meaning is the 
obvious one: that Antonio, now that  he is going to live  in Venice after all, 
wants to use the money as though it were a lifetime loan from Shylock (“let 
me have / Th e other half in use”). To adapt Portia’s phrase, one half of what’s 
Shylock’s—minus the court-mandated  ﬁ ne—is Shylock’s, the other  half, 
“Shylock’s,” though really Antonio’s. At the  end of Shylock’s life—enough 
time, one would think, for Antonio to  relaunch his hazardous business—the 
money will be converted, in the most punishing way, to the use of Shylock’s 
hated son-in-law and daughter. Like the fake lifetime loan, the bequest will 
be a fake (but legal) “gift” from a fake Christian to a fake “son” and a daughter 
he has emotionally disowned. (“Clerk, draw a deed of gift” [4.1.394], Portia 
says to the fake clerk, Nerissa.) Shylock’s choice to keep any of his money is 
thus made contingent on his oﬃ  cial agreement to be ﬁ nancially kind to his 
bitterest enemies, Antonio, Jessica, and Lorenzo. Again, the appearance of 
generosity is made by law a mask for the property interests of everyone.
       Samuel  Ajzenstat has  eloquently argued that  the  stress on  private 
interests in Merchant makes the play not anti-comic, but a diﬀ erent kind of 
romantic comedy than most of  Shakespeare’s others. Perhaps, he suggests, 
with its “basic metaphor [of ] the contract,” the play is “meant to remind us 
that there was never a time when love and friendship did not  have a hard 
time maintaining themselves against the necessities of nature and commerce 

192
                              Law and Self-Interest in The Merchant of Venice                183


even while  depending  on those  necessities for  support”  (Ajzenstat  263,  277). 
Perhaps, though  Shakespeare may  also have meant  to  critique  the  commer-
cial self-interestedness  that   debased human  interaction   in  his  own  London, 
a place  where,  according   to  the  late  sixteenth-century    pamphleteer   Miles 
Mosse, “lending   upon  usury  is grown  so common   and usual  among men,  as 
that free  lending  to the  needy is utterly   overthrown.”  What   seems inarguable 
is that  in  Merchant  Shakespeare’s own  interest  lay  in exploring   how  private 
interests, guarded by law, could  challenge and taint  the  lawless but kind  forces 
of erotic  and ﬁ lial love. In  Th e Comedy of Errors, Antipholus of Ephesus, seek-
ing his  family, is  like a dissolving


               drop of  water,
        Th at in  the ocean, seeks another drop,
        Who,   falling  there  to ﬁ nd his  fellow  forth
        [  . . . ] confounds  himself.  (1.2.35–38)


In Much  Ado about Nothing and  As You Like It, characters  embrace the danger 
of cuckoldry—the    violation  of masculine  identity,   in  conventional  terms—to 
embrace the  mutuality    of  marriage.  “The   horn,   the  horn,  the  lusty  horn   / 
Is not  a thing   to laugh  to  scorn”  sing the  men  of  the Arden   Forest  (4.2.17–
18).15 In these as in most of Shakespeare’s comedies, characters  radically  risk 
their  private identities   to engage the  larger, shared selves found  in familial   or 
marital  relationships.   Laws  that  safeguard ownership—such    as the law  that 
upholds Egeon’s  rights  to  his daughter  in  A Midsummer  Night’s  Dream—are 
done away  with   in  celebration   of  these  larger  connections.   Not   so in  The 
Merchant of Venice, which accomplishes  the reverse. In  this  play, eros, friend-
ship, and  even mercy are  managed so that  each character  keeps legal  title  at 
least to a portion   of  what  he or she owns.


                                                         Notes

          1.   All    quotations   from   Shakespeare’s plays  are  from   The  Riverside 
Shakespeare.
          2.  “Vantage” and “Exclaim”  are so defined  in  The Compact Oxford English 
Dictionary.
          3. The term was used in a post-paper discussion at the 39th Kalamazoo Con-
gress for Medieval Studies, 2004.
          4. See, for example, Samuel Ajzenstat’s “Contract in The Merchant of Venice” 
and Nancy  Elizabeth  Hodge’s “Making   Places at Belmont:  ‘You  Are  Welcome 
Notwithstanding.’ ”
          5. Karoline Szatek comments on Jessica’s “usury” in her marriage transaction 
in “The Merchant of Venice and the Politics of Commerce,” in The Merchant of Venice: 
New Critical Essays, ed. John and Ellen McMahon, 338.

193
184                                                Grace Tiffany


          6. Michael  Radford’s film   version of The Merchant of Venice (Sony Pictures 
Entertainment, 2004) brilliantly   expresses the mixture of romantic and mercenary 
motives in the elopement in its  interpretation of  the scene wherein Lorenzo takes 
Jessica and the money from Shylock’s house. In a gondola below her window  he 
rhapsodically praises her beauty and virtues, but interrupts himself twice with “No!” 
as he sees her about to throw the casket of money and jewels from the window, out 
of fear that the loot will  not land in the boat but sink in  the canal.
          7. As Ajzenstat writes, Portia  implicitly  tells Bassanio at the play’s end, “my 
sexual fidelity is contingent on yours” (270).
          8.  See Bruce Erlich’s  “Queenly  Shadows in  Two  Comedies” (Shakespeare 
Survey 335 [1982]: 65–77), S. F. Johnson’s “How Many Ways Portia Informs Bas-
sanio’s Choice” (Shakespeare’s Universe: Renaissance Ideas and Conventions. Ed. John 
M.  Mucciolo. Aldershot:  Scholar’s Press, 1996. 144–147), Ajzenstat, and Michael 
Zuckert’s “The New Medea: On Portia’s Comic Triumph in The Merchant of Venice” 
(Shakespeare’s Political Pageant: Essays in Literature and Politics. Eds. Joseph Aluis 
and Vickie Sullivan. Lanham, Maryland:  Rowman and Littlefield  Publishers, Inc., 
1996), among others.
          9. Adelman also makes this point (22).
        10.  Nancy Elizabeth  Hodge points  out that  déclassé merchants are also not 
fully welcome at Belmont.
        11.  See James Shapiro’s comment,  “ ‘Coerced’ conversions were  virtually 
unheard of  in the  various narratives circulating  about  Jews in sixteenth-century 
England” (131).
        12.  Lawrence Danson, The Harmonies of The Merchant of Venice, 164. See 
also Joan Ozark Holmer,  who  says that Antonio   requests his half  “in  use” and 
“cannot touch the principal”  (216), and thus appears “all the more generous” (217), 
and John Russell Brown,  who  says Antonio  uses his money for  Shylock. Hugh 
Short, among others, argues that Antonio will manage the money for the benefit of 
Lorenzo and Jessica (199).
        13. As  Peter J. Alscher writes, “Antonio’s [  . . . ] disbursement of his half  of 
Shylock’s wealth with its two painful  financial conditions” is unmerciful  (25).
        14. As Peter J. Alscher and Richard Weisberg note, Antonio’s “ ‘trust’ arrange-
ment practices a form of interest profiting which  he [once] swore to Antonio’s face 
he never engaged in” (204).
        15. See the detailed discussion of the essentialness of the surrender of private 
holdings to mutuality in Grace Tiffany, Erotic Beasts and Social Monsters: Shakespeare, 
Jonson, and Comic Androgyny.


                                                 Works       Cited

Abate, Corinne. “ ‘Nerissa Teaches Me What To Believe’: Portia’s Wifely Empowerment in 
        The Merchant of Venice.” The Merchant of Venice: New Critical Essays. Ed. John and Ellen 
        Mahon. New York: Routledge, 2002. 283–304.
Adelman, Janet. “Her Father’s Blood: Race, Conversion, and Nation in The Merchant of Ven-
        ice.” Representations 81 (Winter 2003): 4–30.
Ajzenstat, Samuel. “Contract in The Merchant of Venice.” Philosophy and Literature 21 (1997): 
        262–278.

194
                                 Law  and  Self-Interest  in The Merchant of Venice                          185


Alscher, Peter J. “ ‘I would be friends with you . . . ’: Staging Directions for a Balanced Resolu-
         tion  to  ‘The Merchant  of Venice’ Trial  Scene.” Cardozo Studies in Law and Literature 
         5.1 (Spring 1993): 1–33.
Alscher, Peter J., and Richard H. Weisberg. “King James and an Obsession with The Merchant 
         of Venice.” Property Law in Renaissance Literature. Ed. Daniela Carpi. New York: Peter 
         Lang,  2005. 1–226.
Barnet, Sylvan, ed. The Merchant of Venice. By William Shakespeare. New York: New Ameri-
         can Library,  1998.
Barton, Anne. Introduction.  The Merchant of Venice. The Riverside Shakespeare. Ed. G. Blake-
         more Evans. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin,    1974. 250–253.
Brown, John Russell, ed. The Merchant of Venice. New York: Methuen, 1961.
Coryate, Thomas. Coryate’s Crudities. London, 1611.
Danson, Lawrence. The Harmonies of The Merchant of Venice. New Haven: Yale UP, 1978.
The Geneva Bible, A Facsimile of the 1560 Edition.  Madison:  U of Wisconsin P, 1967.
Hodge, Nancy  Elizabeth.  “Making   Places at Belmont: ‘You  Are Welcome  Notwithstand-
         ing.’ ” Shakespeare Studies 21 (1993): 155–174.
Holmer,  Joan Ozark. The Merchant of Venice: Choice, Hazard, Consequences. New York: St. 
         Martin’s  Press, 1995.
Logan, Sandra. “ ‘The Will of a Living Daughter’: Letter  and Spirit in The Merchant of Venice.” 
         Paper presented at the Ohio Shakespeare Conference, Toledo, October, 2005.
Marlowe, Christopher.  The Jew of Malta. Christopher Marlowe: The Complete Plays. Ed. J. B. 
         Steane. New York: 1986. 342–430.
Mosse, Miles. The Arraignment and Conviction of Usury. London, 1595.
Shakespeare, William.    The  Riverside Shakespeare. Ed. G.   Blakemore  Evans.  Boston: 
         Houghton-Mifflin,     1974.
Shapiro, James. Shakespeare and the Jews. New York: Columbia UP, 1996.
Short, Hugh. “Shylock Is Content.”  The Merchant of Venice: New Critical Essays. Ed. John and 
         Ellen  Mahon.  New York: Routledge, 2002. 199–212.
Szatek, Karoline.  “The Merchant of Venice and the Politics of Commerce.” The Merchant of 
         Venice: New Critical Essays. Ed. John and Ellen Mahon. New York: Routledge, 2002. 
         325–352.
Tiffany,  Grace. Erotic Beasts and Social Monsters: Shakespeare, Jonson, and Comic Androgyny. 
         Newark:  U of Delaware P, 1995.
Weisberg, Richard. “Antonio’s  Legalistic Cruelty:  Interdisciplinarity   and ‘The  Merchant of 
         Venice.’ ” College Literature 25.1 (Winter 1998): 12–20.

196
                                                   Chronology









1564                    William   Shakespeare christened at Stratford-on-Avon on April 
                            26.

1582                    Marries  Anne Hathaway  in November.

1583                    Daughter  Susanna born, baptized on May 26.

1585                    Twins  Hamnet  and Judith born, baptized on February 2.

1587                    Shakespeare goes to London, without family.

1589–90              Henry VI,  Part 1 written.

1590–91              Henry VI,  Part 2 and Henry VI, Part 3 written.

1592–93              Richard III  and Th e Two Gentlemen of Verona written.

1593                    Publication of Venus and Adonis, dedicated to the Earl of South-
                            ampton;  the Sonnets probably begun.

1593                    Th e Comedy of Errors written.

1593–94              Publication of Th  e Rape of Lucrece, also dedicated to the Earl 
                            of  Southampton. Titus  Andronicus and Th e Taming of the Shrew 
                            written.

1594–95              Love’s Labour’s Lost, King John, and Richard II written.

1595–96              Romeo and Juliet and A Midsummer Night’s Dream written.

1596                    Son Hamnet  dies.




                                                             187

197
188                                                 Chronology


1596–97              Th e Merchant of Venice and Henry IV, Part 1 written; purchases 
                            New  Place in Stratford.

1597–98              Th e Merry Wives of Windsor and Henry IV, Part 2 written.

1598–99              Much Ado About Nothing written.

1599                    Henry V, Julius Caesar, and As You Like It written.

1600–01              Hamlet written.

1601                    Th e Phoenix and the Turtle written; father dies.

1601–02              Twelfth  Night and Troilus and Cressida written.

1602–03              All’s Well Th at Ends Well written.

1603                    Shakespeare’s company becomes the King’s Men.

1604                    Measure for Measure and Othello written.

1605                    King  Lear written.

1606                    Macbeth and Antony and Cleopatra written.

1607                    Marriage  of daughter Susanna on June 5.

1607–08              Coriolanus, Timon of Athens, and Pericles written.

1608                    Mother dies.

1609                    Publication,  probably unauthorized, of the quarto edition  of the 
                            Sonnets.

1609–10              Cymbeline written.

1610–11              Th e Winter’s Tale written.

1611                    Th e Tempest written. Shakespeare returns to Stratford, where he 
                            will  live until  his death.

1612                    A Funeral Elegy written.

1612–13              Henry VIII   written; Th e Globe Th eatre destroyed by ﬁ re.

1613                    Th e Two Noble Kinsmen written (with John Fletcher).

1616                    Daughter   Judith  marries  on  February  10;  Shakespeare dies 
                            April   23.

1623                    Publication  of the  First Folio edition  of Shakespeare’s plays.

198
                                            Contributors








HAROLD   BLOOM   is Sterling Professor of the Humanities at  Yale Uni-
versity. Educated at Cornell and Yale universities, he is the author of more 
than 30 books, including Shelley’s Mythmaking (1959), The Visionary Company 
(1961), Blake’s Apocalypse (1963), Yeats (1970), The Anxiety of Influence (1973), 
A Map of Misreading (1975), Kabbalah and Criticism (1975), Agon: Toward 
a Theory of Revisionism (1982), The American Religion (1992), The Western 
Canon (1994), Omens of Millennium: The Gnosis of Angels, Dreams, and Resur-
rection (1996), Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human (1998), How to Read 
and Why (2000), Genius: A Mosaic of One Hundred Exemplary Creative Minds 
(2002), Hamlet: Poem Unlimited  (2003), Where Shall Wisdom Be Found? 
(2004), and Jesus and Yahweh: The Names Divine (2005). In addition, he is the 
author of hundreds of articles, reviews, and editorial introductions. In 1999, 
Professor Bloom received the American Academy of Arts and Letters’ Gold 
Medal for Criticism. He  has also received the International Prize of Catalo-
nia, the Alfonso Reyes Prize of Mexico, and the Hans Christian Andersen 
Bicentennial Prize of Denmark.

HARRY  BERGER  JR. is professor emeritus of literature  and art  history 
at the University of California,  Santa Cruz, of which he also is a founding 
faculty member. He is the author of numerous books, among them Imaginary 
Audition: Shakespeare on Stage and Page.

COPPÉLIA  KAHN   is a professor of English and gender studies at Brown 
University and was president of the  Shakespeare Association of America. 
Her work on Shakespeare includes Roman Shakespeare: Warriors, Wounds, and 
Women and Man’s Estate: Masculine Identity in Shakespeare.

                                                       189

199
190                                           Contributors

RichaRd     a.  Levin     is a professor in the English department at the Uni-
versity of California, Davis. He has written Shakespeare’s Secret Schemers: The 
Study of an Early Modern Dramatic Device.
RobeRt    oRnstein        was a professor at Case Western Reserve University 
and a president of the Shakespeare Association of America. He wrote many 
books and articles on Shakespeare and other Renaissance dramatists, includ-
ing the texts A Kingdom for a Stage: The Achievement of Shakespeare’s History 
Plays and The Moral Vision of Jacobean Tragedy.
haRRy    Levin    was a professor of comparative literature at Harvard Uni-
versity and is considered one of the founders of the field of comparative lit-
erature in the United States. Some of his major works include The Myth of the 
Golden Age in the Renaissance and Shakespeare and the Revolution of the Times.
tony     tanneR       was a professor at King’s College, Cambridge. He edited 
the eight-volume Everyman edition of Shakespeare’s works. Tanner’s work 
also includes Prefaces to Shakespeare and many other titles that he wrote or 
edited.
W. h.  auden      was a poet, essayist, playwright, editor, and librettist. He 
was Professor of Poetry at the University of Oxford and taught at several uni-
versities in the United States. He wrote many volumes of poetry and edited 
or co-edited many anthologies, including Poets of the English Language.
PeteR   d.  hoLLand        is a professor of Shakespeare studies at the Uni-
versity of Notre  Dame, where he also is chair of  the department of  film, 
television, and theatre. He is editor of Shakespeare Survey, associate general 
editor for the Oxford Drama Library, and co-editor of From Script to Stage in 
Early Modern England.
GRace   tiffany         is a Shakespeare professor in the English department 
at Western Michigan  University.  She has written  Erotic Beasts and Social 
Monsters: Shakespeare, Jonson, and Comic Androgyny and Love’s Pilgrimage: The 
Holy Journey in English Renaissance Literature, as well as a novel based on The 
Merchant of Venice and two others about Shakespeare’s family.

200
                                                 Bibliography









Adelman, Janet. “Her Father’s Blood: Race, Conversion, and Nation  in The Mer-
         chant of Venice.” Representation 81 (2003): 4–30.

Boehrer, Bruce. “Shylock  and the  Rise of  the  Household Pet:  Thinking   Social 
         Exclusion in  The Merchant of Venice.” Shakespeare Quarterly 50, no. 2 (1999): 
         152–170.

Bovilsky, Lara. Barbarous Play: Race on the English Renaissance Stage. Minneapolis: 
         University of Minnesota  Press, 2008.

Carroll,  William   C. The Metamorphoses of Shakespearean Comedy. Princeton, N.J.: 
         Princeton University Press, 1985.

Cookson, Linda,  and  Bryan Loughrey,  eds. The  Merchant  of Venice:  Longman 
         Critical Essays. Essex: Longman, 1992.

Critchley, Simon. “Universal  Shylockery: Money and Morality  in  The Merchant of 
         Venice.” Diacritics: A Review of Contemporary Criticism 34, no. 1 (Spring 2004): 
         3–17.

Danson, Lawrence. The Harmonies of The Merchant of Venice. New Haven: Yale 
         University Press, 1978.

Forman, Valerie. Tragicomic Redemptions: Global Economics and the Early Modern 
         English Stage. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.

Freeman, Jane. “ ‘Fair Terms and a Villain’s Mind’: Rhetorical Patterns in The Mer-
         chant of Venice.” Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric 20, no. 2 (Spring 
         2002): 149–172.

Frye, Northrop. A Natural Perspective: The Development of Shakespearean Comedy and 
         Romance. New York: Columbia University Press, 1965.

Garber, Marjorie. Shakespeare and Modern Culture. New York: Pantheon, 2008.



                                                             191

201
192                                                 Bibliography


Girard,  René. “ ‘To Entrap the Wisest’: A  Reading of  The Merchant of Venice.” In 
         Literature and Society, ed. E. W. Said. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
         Press, 1980.

Gleckman, Jason. “The Merchant of Venice: Laws Written and Unwritten in Venice.” 
         Critical Review 41 (2001): 81–94.

Gross, John. Shylock: A Legend and Its Legacy. New York: Simon  and Schuster, 
         1992.

Gross, Kenneth.  Shylock Is Shakespeare. Chicago: University of Chicago  Press, 
         2006.

Halio,  Jay L. Understanding The Merchant of Venice: A Student Casebook to Issues, 
         Sources, and Historical Documents. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2000.

Halpern, Richard. Shakespeare Among the Moderns. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 
         Press, 1997.

Holmer, Joan Ozark. The  Merchant of Venice: Choice, Hazard, Consequences. New 
         York: St. Martin’s  Press, 1995.

Honigmann, E.  A. J. British Academy Shakespeare Lectures 1980–89. Oxford: Oxford 
         University Press, 1993.

Huffman,   Clifford   Chalmers, ed.  Love’s  Labor’s Lost,  A   Midsummer  Night’s 
         Dream, and The Merchant of Venice: An Annotated Bibliography of Shakespeare 
         Studies, 1888–1994. Binghamton, N.Y.: Medieval &  Renaissance Texts and 
         Studies, 1995.

Hutson, Lorna.  The  Usurer’s Daughter: Male Friendship and Fictions of Women in 
         Sixteenth-Century England. New York: Routledge, 1994.

Janik, Vicki  K.  The  Merchant  of Venice: A  Guide to the Play. Westport, Conn.: 
         Greenwood Press, 2003.

Kitch,  Aaron. “Shylock’s Sacred Nation.” Shakespeare Quarterly 59, no. 2 (Summer 
         2008): 131–155.

Lampert, Lisa. Gender and Jewish Difference from Paul to Shakespeare. Philadelphia: 
         University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004.

Levin, Carole. Shakespeare’s Foreign Worlds: National and Transnational Identities in 
         the Elizabethan Age. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2009.

Lewis, Cynthia.  Particular  Saints: Shakespeare’s Four Antonios, Their Contexts, and 
         Their Plays. Newark: University of Delaware Press; London; Cranbury, N.J.: 
         Associated University Presses, 1997.

Logan, Robert  A.  Shakespeare’s Marlowe: The Influence of Christopher Marlowe on 
         Shakespeare’s Artistry. Aldershot, England; Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate, 2007.

Mahon, John W.,  and Ellen  Macleod Mahon,  ed. The Merchant  of Venice: New 
         Critical Essays. London, England: Routledge, 2002.

Majeske, Andrew,  and Emily   Detmer-Goebel, ed.  Justice, Women, and Power in 
         English Renaissance Drama. Madison, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson  University 
         Press, 2009.

202
                                                      Bibliography                                                 193


McGinn,  Colin.  Shakespeare’s Philosophy: Discovering the Meaning Behind the Plays. 
         New York: HarperCollins,  2006.

McPherson, David C. Shakespeare, Jonson, and the Myth of Venice. Newark: University 
         of  Delaware Press; London; Cranbury, N.J.:  Associated University Presses, 
         1990.

Newman, Karen. Essaying Shakespeare. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
         2009.

           . “Portia’s Ring: Unruly  Women and the Structure of Exchange in The Mer-
         chant of Venice.” Shakespeare Quarterly 38, no. 1 (1987): 19–33.

           . Shakespeare’s Rhetoric of Comic Character: Dramatic Convention in Classical 
         and Renaissance Comedy. New York: Methuen, 1985.

Occhiogrosso, Frank, ed. Shakespeare in Performance: A Collection of Essays. Newark: 
         University of Delaware Press, 2003.

Oz, Avraham. The Yoke of Love: Prophetic Riddles in The Merchant of Venice. Newark: 
         University of Delaware Press; London: Associated University Presses, 1995.

Robinson, Elaine L. Shakespeare Attacks Bigotry: A Close Reading of Six Plays. Jeffer-
         son, N.C.: McFarland,  2009.

Roston,  Murray.  Tradition  and  Subversion in Renaissance Literature: Studies in 
         Shakespeare, Spenser, Jonson, and Donne. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University 
         Press, 2007.

Salinger, L.  G.  Shakespeare and the Traditions of Comedy. Cambridge: Cambridge 
         University Press, 1974.

Schneider, Robert. Shylock, The Roman: Unmasking Shakespeare’s The Merchant of 
         Venice. Mill  Valley, Calif.:  Pulpless.com, 1999.

Schwartz, Regina M.  “The  Price  of Justice and Love in  The Merchant of Venice.” 
         Tr iQuarterly 124 (2006): 225–241.

Shannon, Laurie. “Likenings: Rhetorical Husbandries and Portia’s ‘True Conceit’ of 
         Friendship.” Renaissance Drama 31 (2002): 3–26.

Shapiro, James. Shakespeare and the Jews. New York: Columbia University Press, 
         1996.

Sherman, Anita  Gilman.  “Disowning  Knowledge of  Jessica, or Shylock’s Skepti-
         cism.”  Studies in English Literature,  1500–1900 44,  no.  2  (Spring  2004): 
         277–295.

Special Issue: Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice. Cithara: Essays in the Judaeo-
         Christian Tradition 46, no. 1 (November 2006): 3–63.

Spiller, Elizabeth  A.   “From  Imagination  to  Miscegenation: Race and  Romance 
         in   Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice.” Renaissance Drama 29 (1998): 
         137–164.

Turner, Henry  S. “The  Problem of the  More-than-One:  Friendship, Calculation, 
         and Political  Association in The Merchant of Venice.” Shakespeare Quarterly 57, 
         no. 4 (Winter  2006): 413–442.

203
194                                                 Bibliography


Weisberg, Richard H., ed. A  Symposium Issue on The Merchant of Venice. Cardozo 
         Studies in Law and Literature 5, no. 1 (Spring 1993).

Wells, Stanley, and Lena Cowen Orlin, ed. Shakespeare: An Oxford Guide. New York: 
         Oxford  University Press, 2003.

Wheeler, Thomas, ed. The Merchant of Venice: Critical Essays. New York: Garland, 
         1991.

Wilson,  Richard.  Secret Shakespeare: Studies in Theatre, Religion, and Resistance. 
         Manchester, England: Manchester University Press, 2004.

Yachnin, Paul, and Patricia Badir,  ed. Shakespeare and the Cultures of Performance. 
         Aldershot, England;  Burlington,  Vt.: Ashgate, 2008.

Ya ffe, Martin D.  Shylock and the Jewish Question. Baltimore, Md.; London: Johns 
         Hopkins  University Press, 1997.

204
                                           Acknowledgments









Harry  Berger  Jr., “Marriage   and  Mercifixion    in  The Merchant  of Venice: The 
Casket Scene Revisited.”  From  Shakespeare Quarterly vol. 32, no.  2  (Summer 
1981): 155–62. Copyright  ©  1981 by the Folger  Shakespeare Library. 


Coppélia  Kahn,  “The  Cuckoo’s Note:  Male  Friendship  and  Cuckoldry  in  The 
Merchant of  Venice.” From  Shakespeare’s “Rough Magic”: Renaissance Essays in 
Honor of C. L.  Barber, edited by Peter Erickson  and Coppélia  Kahn.  Published 
by University  of  Delaware  Press. Copyright  ©   1985 by Associated  University 
Presses.


Richard  A.  Levin,  “Portia’s  Belmont.”  From  Love  and Society in Shakespearean 
Comedy: A Study of Dramatic Form and Content. Published by University of Dela-
ware Press. Copyright ©  1985 by Associated University  Presses. 


Robert  Ornstein,  “The  Merchant of Venice.” From Shakespeare’s Comedies: From 
Roman Farce to Romantic Mystery. Published by  University  of  Delaware Press. 
Copyright  ©  1986 by Associated University  Presses.


Harry  Levin,  “A  Garden in  Belmont:  The Merchant of Venice, 5.1.” From Shake-
speare and Dramatic Tradition: Essays in Honor of S. F. Johnson, edited by W. R. 
Elton  and William   B. Long.  Published by  University  of Delaware Press. Copy-
right  © 1989 by Associated University   Presses. 


Tony Tanner, “Which   Is the Merchant  Here? And  Which  the  Jew?: The Venice 
of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice.” From Venetian Views, Venetian Blinds: Eng-


                                                             195

205
196                                            Acknowledgments


lish Fantasies of Venice, edited by Manfred Pfister and Barbara Schaff. Copyright 
© 1999 by Editions   Rodopi B.V. 


W.  H.  Auden,  “The  Merchant of Venice.” From  Lectures on Shakespeare, recon-
structed and edited  by Arthur   Kirsch.  Copyright  ©  2000  by Arthur   Kirsch  for 
the notes and ©  2000  by the  estate of W.  H.  Auden  for  lectures and writings 
by Auden.


Peter D.   Holland,   “The  Merchant of  Venice and the  Value  of  Money.”  From 
Cahiers Élisabéthains 60 (October 2001): 13–30. Copyright   ©  2001 by  Cahiers 
Élisabéthains.


Grace Tiffany,  “Law and Self-Interest  in The Merchant of Venice.” From Papers on 
Language and Literature vol. 42, no. 4 (Fall 2006):  384–400. Copyright   ©  2006 
by the Board  of Trustees, Southern Illinois   University  Edwardsville.   Reprinted 
by permission.




























Every  effort   has been made  to  contact  the  owners  of  copyrighted   material 
and secure copyright  permission.  Articles   appearing  in  this volume  generally 
appear much as they did  in  their  original  publication   with   few or no  editorial 
changes. In   some cases, foreign  language  text   has been  removed  from  the 
original   essay. Those interested  in  locating  the  original   source will   find  the 
information   cited  above.

206
                                                         Index




Abate, Corinne,  178                                        ships/argosies of, 60, 65, 91, 158, 
Adelman,  Janet, 20, 179                                      178
aesthetic awareness, 141, 148                        Shylock  maligned  by, 75
aesthetic flaws, 5                                              wealth of,  69, 71
Ajzenstat, Samuel, 178, 182–183               aphorisms, 36
allegorical interpretations,  51, 85–86         appearance/reality theme,  101
All ’s Well That Ends Well                           Argonauts,  golden fleece and, 101
    (Shakespeare)                                        Aristotle,   126, 128,  143
     Helena in,  113                                       As You Like It (Shakespeare), 97, 107, 
alternative title,  99                                           183
ambiguity,  52, 61, 161                                     god Hymen  in,  19, 114
Ancient  Pistol (Henry  V ), 7                            Rosalind  in, 113
anti-Semitism,  1, 8, 66,  83, 100                Atheist’s Tragedy, The (Tourneur), 100
     in Elizabethan  plays, 94                        Auden,  W. H.,  3,  116, 139–150
     seriousness and, 149, 150                     audience, 8, 49, 53, 88
     of Shakespeare, 69                                Auerbach, Erich,  115
Antonio  (The Merchant of Venice)
     Bassanio and, 11, 40, 43, 68,                Bacon, Francis,  126, 128
          86–87                                                Balthazar  (The Merchant of Venice), 
     business success of, 68                              48, 85, 170, 179
     courtroom  speech of, 52–53                      “bond”   and, 132
     generosity of, 27, 41, 42, 70, 74,                 ring and,  55, 111
          82, 158, 170, 178                              Barabas (Jew of Malta, The), 1, 4, 6, 
     idealism of,  74, 75, 76                                7, 8, 66, 118, 129
     as Jew baiter, 2, 7                                  Barber, C.  L.,  4, 97, 116
     letter to  Bassanio, 22, 41, 56, 82,         Barnet,  Sylvan, 175
          94                                                      Barton,  Anne,  100
     “merry bond”  and, 76–77                      Barton,  John, 165, 166
     pound of flesh  suggestion, 22, 50,        Bassanio (The Merchant of Venice)
          54, 103, 152–153                                   Antonio   and, 11, 40, 69, 156–157
     prodigality  of,  123                                      as “braggart,” 44


                                                             197

207
198                                                      Index


     casket/scroll choice, 36, 39, 70,             casket scene, 9–18, 35–36, 77–81, 
         80–81,  167                                             129–130, 140
     fidelity  to  Portia, 90                                    complexions and, 78
     financial  plea of, 123                                  as fairytale  challenge, 67, 71
     “golden fleece” quest, 13, 101,                    famous problem about, 12
         124,  129, 159, 181                                 inscriptions  on caskets, 34, 78
     journey to  Belmont,  159                            kiss from  Portia,  39, 40, 81
     letter from  Antonio,   41, 82                        lead casket/Bassanio, 11, 20, 36, 
     manipulation  by Portia,  59                             37, 102
     prodigality  of,  68                                        as a “lottery,”  37, 101
     ring from  Portia,  134, 135, 177                  as romantic comedy, 30
     rivals for  affection of,  20, 22, 45,               song/music and, 36,  80, 141–142
         69                                                            subtextual  implications  in, 15
     sacrifices for friend’s  life, 51                       suitors, 31–32, 35–36, 140
     speeches of, 81                                      Christians/Christianity,    76, 83, 127
     “twofold  truth”   of, 44                                 Christian   blood, 51, 87, 147
Belmont,  Italy, 29–63,  55, 60, 125                 conversion/price  of hogs, 56, 88
     concord of, 2, 109, 145                               forced  conversion, 2, 53, 181–182
     garden in, 97–116                                       Jews and, 1, 6, 53, 66
     insular world  of, 93–94                               mercy and, 49, 85
     Venice and, 68                                            prodigality   of, 77, 105–106, 123
Berger, Harry  Jr., 9–18                                    revenge learned from, 84, 149
Berry, Ralph,  41                                         civic  virtue,  94
Bible, the                                                     Coghill,   Nevill,  51
     Geneva Bible, 156                                 Coleridge,  Samuel Taylor,  100
     New Testament, 1,  104, 105, 113,        Comedy of Errors, The (Shakespeare), 
         120,  152                                                 20, 65, 164, 173, 175, 179, 183
     Old  Testament, 53, 105, 133, 160              Antipholi   in, 21
Blake, William,   8                                             loan of a ring  in, 113
Bloom, Harold,   1–8                                        Menaechmi source of, 67
     anti-Semitism  and, 1, 8                         commercial/financial   terms,  127–130
     irony and,  4–5, 8                                   Contes (La Fontaine), 114
     pathos and, 1, 4, 6                                 Correll,   Barbara, 175
     Shylock’s false conversion, 2, 3,            Coryate, Thomas,  181
         5,  6                                                    courtroom  scene. See also Duke of 
Booth, Edwin,   115                                          Venice; law/ lega l it y
Brecht, Bertolt,  115                                         allegorical  interpretations  of, 86
Brockbank, Philip, 120, 125, 131, 135             hypocritical   literalism  in,  91
Brown, John Russell, 42,  184                         legal  imagery, 33
buggery/buggerer, 136                                     legality  of bond, 84
Burckhardt,  Sigurd,  129                                 personal drama  in, 46,  53
                                                                         plotting   against Venetians, 51
Cade, Jack, 106                                               poetic  justice of hearing,  100
Cahors, usury and, 143, 150                            pound of  flesh demand, 45–46, 
Caliban (Te mpest, The), 5, 6                               50

208
                                                            Index                                                      199


     trump  card, 86                                       father-child  theme,  11
courtship plot,  19                                        feudal society, 139–140
Crusades, the, 120                                      Fichte, Johann Gottlieb,   146
cuckoldry, 19–28, 113–114, 183                 fidelity
     cuckoo reference, 58                                   promises of, 24, 43, 60,  90
     double standard and, 25                             rings  and, 21, 24, 27, 55
     female ascendancy and, 26–27             Fiedler,  Leslie, 59
     as retaliation, 21, 26                               fifth   act/final  scene, 17, 91–92, 109
Cymbeline (Shakespeare), 164, 166                love duet in, 136
                                                                         “lyrical   movement” of,  100
Dante Alighieri                                                  “problem”  of, 92–93
     Inferno, 143                                                 sub-subplot of,  98
Dickens, Charles,  7                                         unity  and, 115
Disraeli,  Benjamin, 7                                  Fiorentino,  Ser Giovanni
Doctor Faustus (Marlowe)                                Il  Pecorone, 66, 67, 71, 87, 101
     Mephistopheles in,  7                             Fischer, Susan L.,  163–164, 170
Dr. Bellario  (The Merchant of Venice),       five-act  pseudoclassical structure, 98
    23, 47–48,  85, 179                                 Forster, E.  M.,  140–141
ducats. See money, value of                       Fortune, 14, 16,  36, 40, 106, 179
Duke of  Venice (The Merchant of              Freud,  Sigmund, 101
    Venice)                                                    Freytag, Gustav, 98
     law of contracts and,  85                        Fulgens and Lucres (Medwall), 98
     outsiders and, 47                                   Furness, H.  H.,  102
     sentencing of Shylock, 87, 181
     setting of  precedents, 179–180             Gémier, Firmin,   115
     superiority  of Venetians and, 52           Gesta Romanorum, 101, 130
                                                                    Giovanni.  See Fiorentino, Ser 
Edmund  (King Lear), 1, 7                                Giovanni
Eliot,  George, 7                                          Girard,  René, 4–5,  25
Elizabeth  (Queen), 126                              Globe  Theatre, 126
Elizabethans, 32, 66,  74, 120, 139            Gloucester  (King Lear), 9, 10, 54
     Catholic  worship and,  88                      Gobbo. See Launcelot Gobbo
     theater of, 111                                        Goddard,  Harold  C.,  3, 4
     usury forbidden  by, 94                          Goodman  Theatre,  168
England                                                       Gorboduc, 98
     legal institution   in, 98                           Granville-Barker,   Harley,  98, 101, 
     London,  England,  118, 120, 127               108
Ervine,  St. John                                          Gratiano  (The Merchant of Venice), 3, 
     The Lady of Belmont, 116                           40, 133
ethnicity.  See also racial prejudice                  conversational style of, 112,  143
     historical  attitudes about,  100                   failure  to  keep ring, 91
European Middle   Ages, 101                           Jew baiting by, 52, 93
                                                                         Nerissa and, 62
fairy tales, 67, 71, 101                                      prodigality  and,  123–124
Falstaff (Henry IV,  Part 2), 2, 5,  93                pun  on Gentile, 104

209
200                                                      Index


     puns/wordplay of,  162–163                        conversion of, 89, 104, 122
     ring and,  59, 111                                        elopement with  Lorenzo,  15–16, 
Gross, John, 118, 133                                           56, 77, 83, 176
                                                                         inheritance  for, 52
Halio,  Jay, 162–163                                        in  love duet, 136
Hallam,  Henry,  101                                        sale of ring  for  monkey, 90, 104, 
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 99, 164                            129, 142
     Laertes in,  98                                             Shylock’s wealth  and, 87
happiness/suffering connection,  115               speech of, 56, 154
Hazlitt,   William,   3, 98, 102                            wealth squandered by, 83
Heine, Heinrich,   99                                   Jessica and Lorenzo subplot, 129
Henry IV, Part 2 (Shakespeare), 93,           Jew of Malta, The (Marlowe),  7, 173
    99                                                                 Abigail   in, 104
Henry V (Shakespeare), 106, 151                    Barabas in, 66, 118, 129
     Katherine  in, 93                                     Jew of Venice, The (Lansdowne), 99
hero/heroine, 65, 71, 80                              Jewess. See Jessica
     Hercules as, 11, 39                                Jews, 75, 99
     hero-villain,   6                                             Christians  and, 53, 66
     title  role and, 99                                          “gentile”  virtue of  mercy and, 47
Hitler,  Adolf,  100                                             Hebraic legalism,  85
Holland,  Peter D.,  151–171                            stereotypes, 66, 100
Holmer,  Joan Ozark, 182, 184                        usury  and, 127
Howe, William    F., 147–148                      Johnson, Samuel, 115
Hyman,  Lawrence, 11                                     on Shylock’s  argument, 47
Hymen (As You Like It), 19, 114                 Jonson, Ben
                                                                         Volpone, 98, 100
“I Believe”  (Forster), 140–141                    journey
Iago (Othello), 1, 3, 7, 8, 73                             biblical  versus spiritual,  61
Il Pecorone (Giovanni), 130                             to  social position,  55
     heroine in,  71                                        justice,  51
     Lady of  Belmont  in, 67, 87, 101
     tawdry world  of, 67                                Kahn,  Coppélia,  19–28
     villainous  Jew in, 66                              Kant,  Immanuel,  146–147
Inferno (Dante), 143, 150                            Kean, Edmund,  99
infidelity,  double  standard and, 21.           Kempe,  Will,   103
    See also cuckoldry                                  Kermode,  Frank, 128
insularity,  38, 93–94                                   King John (Shakespeare), 178
irony/ironic  depth,  4–5, 8                           King Lear (Shakespeare)
Irving,  Henry,  3, 99, 169                                 Cordelia  in, 110
Isabella (The Merchant of Venice), 86             Gloucester in,  54
                                                                         Lear  in, 54
Jacobean comedies/drama, 69, 98                  sons of Gloucester in,  98–99
Jason/argonauts/golden fleece, 11,            Kittredge,   G. L.,  100
    13, 57, 101, 159, 181
Jessica (The Merchant of Venice), 108      La  Fontaine

210
                                                            Index                                                      201


     Contes, 114                                                 friendship  and, 113, 140–141
Lady of Belmont, The (Ervine), 116                 iambic/noniambic   rhythm  and, 
language. See words/wordplay                             167
Lansdowne, Viscount,  99                                “unthrift   love,”  161
Launcelot Gobbo  (The Merchant of           Love’s Labour’s Lost (Shakespeare), 
    Venice), 77, 108, 127, 130                           65, 98, 173
     in Bassanio’s service, 29                             heroines of, 71
     conversion/price of hogs, 2,  56, 
          88, 169                                              Macbeth (Shakespeare), 103
     morality  play/ethical  quandary,            Macklin,   Charles,  99
          103                                                    Mahábhárata, the,  101
     in Shylock’s employ, 69                         male  friendship,  19–28
law/legality,  84, 173–185. See also                 homoerotic attachment,  21, 26
    courtroom  scene; Duke  of Venice              male identity  and,  20
     contemporary case in, 147–148                  sacrifices for friend’s  life,  22
     contractual laws/property,  174–            Malvolio   (Twelfth Night),  5, 6, 93, 
          175                                                         115
     English  law, 153                                    marginalization,   56, 149
     fortune  and, 179                                    Marian  persecutions, 88
     Hebraic notion  of,  132                          Marlowe,  Christopher,  8
     literalism,  moment of  reversal,                  Doctor Faustus, 7
          132                                                         The Jew of Malta, 6, 7, 66,  104, 
Lear (King  Lear), 9                                               118, 173
Lear’s Fool (King Lear),  5, 6                      Marriage  of Figaro, The (Mozart), 
Levin,  Harry,  97–116                                     111
Levin,  Richard  A., 29–63                           Marx,  Karl,  122
Lewalski,  Barbara, 115                              Measure for Measure (Shakespeare), 
lines spoken, by character, 99                         85, 109
literalism,  91                                                    Vincentio  in,  135
     moment of  reversal, 132                       Medea,  11, 57
     play’s critique of,  180                            Menaechmi (Plautus), 67
Logon, Sandra, 178                                    mercy
London,  England,  118, 120, 127                    courtroom  scene and, 49, 53, 86
Lopez, Roderigo,  139                                      Portia  standing for, 51, 52
Lorenzo (The Merchant of Venice),            “merry  bond,”  76–77, 81, 82
    108                                                               Bassanio’s objection to, 87
     elopement with  Jessica, 15–16,                 “merry  sport”  and, 121, 180
          56, 57–58, 105, 176                          Middle   Ages, 101
     in love duet,  136                                    Middleton,   Thomas, 152
     materialism  of, 61                                  Midsummer Night’s Dream, A 
     Shylock’s wealth and, 87                            (Shakespeare), 19, 97, 107, 136, 
     speech of, 63                                              173, 175, 179, 183
love, 14, 50. See also romance                   misogyny, 25
     as act of faith,  92                                   money, value of, 151–171
     betrayal and, 57                                           betting/wagers,  162

211
202                                                      Index


     creditors/speculation,  157                          disguise of,  20, 23, 44, 48,  55, 
     ducats, 152, 164                                              84–85,  179
     estimates of value, 164                               dual  self of, 13, 38–39
     “rate,” “noble rate”  and, 157–158,              father’s will   and, 16, 23, 31, 32, 
          165                                                              34–35, 37, 38, 71, 81, 86,  102
     “thrift”/“thriftiness,”    124, 126, 160             gift  of ring  to  Bassanio, 23–24, 
     ventures, financing  of, 158, 161                      25–26, 86
moneylending, 144, 155. See also                   insularity  of,  38
    Shylock;  usury                                             legal points/trap,  50, 51, 52, 100, 
Moody, A.  D.,  50                                                 109, 132, 147
Mosse, Miles,  183                                           marriage  of, 44–45
Mozart,  Wolfgang  Amadeus, 112                   masculine disguise of,  23
Much Ado about Nothing                                  mercy in courtroom,  51, 52,  53, 
    (Shakespeare), 19, 164, 175, 183                    85,  86
     Claudio  and Benedick in,  70                     ring  retrieval  from  Bassanio, 90, 
     Don  Pedro in, 12                                             166–167, 169
mutatis mutandis, 131                                      sacrifice/self-giving,   10, 11, 12
                                                                         speeches of, 62, 81
National  Theatre Company,  58, 62                suitors of,  31–32, 35–36, 142, 150
Nerissa (The Merchant of Venice),                  treason question,  14, 15
    30–31, 40                                                     wealth  of, 22, 141, 153–155, 165, 
     disguise of, 44, 48,  111                                   168, 177
     Gratiano  and, 62, 162                                wit  of,  16, 23, 33, 71, 90
     Portia’s suitors and, 31, 32–33              Pound,  Ezra, 128
     ring and,  59                                           pound  of flesh, 22,  85, 103, 152–153
                                                                         courtroom  scene and, 45, 46
“Of  Usury”  (Bacon), 126                                 drop  of blood and, 51, 87, 147
Olivier,  Sir Laurence, 92                                  famous moment of  reversal, 132
Orenstein, Robert,  65–95                                as “merry bond,”  121
Othello (Shakespeare)                                     “nearest the heart,”  52
     Iago in,  73                                                  stories of,  1, 101
     Othello  in,  24, 67                                  Prince of  Arragon  (The Merchant of 
                                                                         Venice), 35, 77, 86, 102
pathos, 1, 4, 6                                                  casket/scroll  choice, 37, 78, 79
Patience (Bunthorne’s Bride), 114                   as outsider, 38
Plautus, 97                                                  Prince of  Morocco  (The Merchant of 
     Menaechmi, 67                                           Venice), 77, 86, 102, 160
plots, 19, 98–99. See also ring plot/                 complexion of,  37, 38, 78, 88, 134
    rings                                                             gold  casket choice of, 35, 78–79
Pope, Alexander, 42                                         as suitor, 32
Portia (The Merchant of Venice)                 prodigality,   68, 77, 105–106, 123–
     class status of, 30, 31, 45, 52, 60               124
     courtroom  scene and, 49–53, 54,              being  “sufficient”   and, 161
         86                                                            rejection  of thrift   and, 163

212
                                                            Index                                                      203


Quiller-Couch,   Sir Arthur,   100, 101              Shylock and,  89
                                                                    Salutati,  Antonio,  164
racial prejudice. See also ethnicity              scapegoat, 4. See also Shylock
     complexion and, 37, 38, 78,  134           Schlegel, A.  W., 98
     dark-skinned  people, 36, 94                  Schwartz, Maurice
religion,  120                                                     Shylock and His Daughter, 116
religious bigotry,  92                                    self-interest, 173–185
Renaissance, 43, 60, 67                             Sellars, Peter, 168
     literature/plays,  36, 66, 114                   sexuality, 9
     mercantile Venice in,  119                           homoerotic  attachment, 11, 21, 
     money-lending  during,  74                              23,  26, 69, 113, 135–136, 168
     patronage and, 125                                     masculine disguise and,  23
Republic (Socrates), 9                                      masculine virility,   162
revenge, 6                                                        promiscuity,  114
     Christianity   and, 84, 149                           ring  metaphor  and, 24, 114
     revenge plays, 146                                      sexual equality, 24–25
Richard II (Shakespeare), 106                         sexual freedom/rights,  24,  25, 44
ring plot/rings,   17, 19–28, 59–60,                   sexual politics, 11–12, 58
    111, 114–115                                               virginity,   24, 80
     act 5 and, 55                                          Shakespeare, William,   69, 101, 175
     ambiguity  of ring  trick,  61                         All ’s Well That Ends Well, 113
     cuckoldry  and, 23                                       As You Like It, 19, 97, 107, 113, 
     gift  of ring  to Bassanio, 23–24,                      183
         40                                                            audience of, 49, 53, 88
     loss of rings, 59, 134                                   The Comedy of Errors, 20, 21, 65, 
     male dominance and, 26                                  97, 164, 173, 179, 183
     marriage bond representation,  24              critics  of, 4, 105
     metaphor, sexuality and,  24                       Cymbeline, 164
     ring return  to  Portia,  89–90, 91                first   editor for,  99
     summarization  of, 20–21                            Hamlet, 98, 99, 164
     triangulated  rivalry  and, 27                        Henry IV, Part  2, 93, 99
     Venetians and, 25                                       Henry V, 93,  106, 151
     wordplay on “rings,”  21, 24,                        King John, 178
         162–163                                                  King  Lear, 54, 98–99
romance, 34–35. See also love                        Love’s Labour’s Lost, 65, 98, 173
     disillusionment  and, 39                               Macbeth, 103
     speeches and, 81                                        Measure for Measure, 85, 109
Romeo and Juliet (Shakespeare), 107             A Midsummer Night’s Dream, 19, 
Rowe, Nicholas, 99                                               97, 98, 107, 136, 173, 175, 179, 
                                                                              183
Salerio and Solanio (The Merchant of              Much Ado about Nothing, 12, 19, 
    Venice), 69, 121                                                121, 164, 175, 183
     Jessica’s elopement and, 87                       Othello, 73
     mockery by, 99                                            Richard II,  106

213
204                                                      Index


     Romeo and Juliet, 107                                feudal  society, 139–140
     Sonnets, 43, 44                                           journey  to social position,  55
     The Taming of the Shrew, 81, 113,             marginalization   and, 56, 149
          173                                                         need for  money and, 144
     The Tempest, 97, 98                                   place within,  44,  72
     Timon of Athens, 151–152, 164             Socrates
     Twelfth Night,  5, 19, 100, 115,                   Republic, 9
          164                                                    Solanio. See Salerio and Solanio
     The Two Gentlemen of Verona, 20,       Sonnets (Shakespeare), 43, 44
          65, 103, 113                                      Spanish Inquisition,   88
     underplots of,  98–99                             Stationers’ Register, 99
     The Winter’s Tale, 97                             Stephano (The Merchant of Venice), 
Shaw, Bernard, 99, 102, 116                           57, 108
Shylock (The Merchant of Venice),             Stewart, Patrick,  165, 168
    144–145                                                  Stoll,  E. E.,  100
     as alien/outsider/scapegoat, 60,                 on  Shylock, 1, 4, 66
         66,  115, 122, 145, 148, 149              Stratford-upon-Avon,   165
     forced conversion of, 2, 3, 5,  6,             Suchet, David,  165
         53,  87, 88, 93, 94, 122, 181              Swinburne,  Algernon  Charles, 100
     hatred of Antonio,   91, 126
     humanity  of, 45, 93, 95                         Talmud,  the,  8
     humiliations  of,  75, 83, 122                  Taming of the Shrew, The 
     “humor”  of, 54,  84, 85                               (Shakespeare), 173
     “I  am content,” 3, 53                                   Kate/Katherina   in,  81, 113
     “Jewishness” of, 126, 132                      Tanner, Tony,  117–137
     Laban’s sheep and,  144, 156,               Ta rtars, 47
         160                                                     Tawney, R.  H.,  126
     legalism/laws  and, 50, 86, 87                Tempest, The (Shakespeare), 97
     “losing  suit” reference, 54                     Terry,  Ellen,  102, 169
     memorable claim of,  133                       The Jew of Malta (Marlowe),  7
     “merry bond”  of,  81, 82, 121                Three Ladies of London (Wilson), 66
     pound of flesh  demand by, 45–             Tiffany,  Grace, 173–185
         46,  50, 85, 87, 103, 180                    Timon  of Athens (Shakespeare), 
     “special deed of gift,”  91                            151–152, 164
     as stereotype, 69, 72                             Titus  Andronicus
     theft  of ring  of, 168–169                            Aaron  the Moor   in, 7
     “thriftiness”   of, 124, 126                       “Tom  o’Bedlam”  (song), 5–6
     usury/rate of interest  set, 74, 143         trial.   See courtroom scene
     villainy  of, 72,  73                                  Tu rk s, 47, 75
     wealth forfeited  by, 133                         Twelfth Night  (Shakespeare), 19, 100, 
Shylock and His Daughter (Schwartz),            164
    116                                                               Malvolio   in,  5, 115
slavery, 46–47, 94, 144                                    Olivia’s  gifts in,  70
society, 145. See also Venice, It aly/          Two Gentlemen of Verona, The 
    Venetians                                                     (Shakespeare), 20, 65, 103, 113

214
                                                            Index                                                      205


underplots, 98–99                                            Royal  Merchant  Adventurers 
usury, 72, 136, 170. See also                               Club  of, 16
    moneylending                                               as slave owners, 46–47, 85, 144
     biblical  quote regarding, 156                 Volpone (Jonson), 98, 100
     Cahors and, 143, 150
     historical  attitudes about,  100              Wars  of the Roses, 106
     legality  of, 126                                       Webster, John
     negative usury, 17                                       The White Devil,  98
     Shylock guilty  of,  143                           Welch,  Alexander, 9
utilitarian  theory,  146–147                         Wesker, Arnold,  100,  166
                                                                    White Devil,  The (Webster), 98
Venice, It aly/ Venetians, 33, 124–             Wilson,   Robert
    125, 142.  See also society                          Three Ladies of London, 66
     abuses of human life in,  46                   Winter’s Tale, The (Shakespeare), 97
     Belmont  and, 68                                    women’s societal roles, 45, 71–72
     as Christian,  holy city,  29, 30,              words/wordplay
          120                                                         commercial/financial   terms, 
     commercialism/economy  of, 44,                      127–130
          99, 119, 139, 152, 178                           “commodity,”   178
     discords of, 109                                           frequency of specific  words, 109
     Ghetto  Venice, 118                                    key  words, 109–110, 114, 123
     ideals versus practices, 47                          lines spoken, by character, 99
     insular world  of, 93–94,  122, 145              monosyllables/parallelism,  110
     law/justice  and, 48,  49, 85, 86,                  multiple  pun, 13
          88                                                           “rings,”  21, 24, 162–163
     mirror  image in  Shylock, 46                       sexuality and, 162
     opulence of, 68, 144                                    treason/confession, 80
     prejudices of, 51, 55, 66
     ring plot  and, 25                                    Yiddish  theater, 100

