3
                             Copyright ©  2019 by Lauren Asher. 
                                          All  rights reserved. 

No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
  mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
    without written permission from the author, except for the use of brief
                                    quotations in a book review.

  This book is a work of fiction.  Names, characters, organizations, places,
events, and incidents are either products of the author’s imagination or are
                                             used fictitiously.

                                              THROTTLED
                                       Editing: Erica Russikoff
                      Proofreading: Sarah, All Encompassing Books
               Cover Model: Justin Edward Hughes @justin_edwardh
Cover Photography: Jono Madison, Jono Photography @jonophotography
                              Cover Designer: Books and Moods
               Interior Formatting: Jovana Shirley, Unforeseen Editing

4
                            Mom,
            Thank you for everything, 
              including the holy water 
you’ll bathe me in after you read this book.

5
Contents






      Playlist
     Prologue
           1
           2
           3
           4
           5
           6
           7
           8
           9
          10
          11
          12
          13
          14
          15
          16
          17
          18
          19
          20
          21
          22
          23
          24
          25
          26
          27
          28
          29
          30

6
                      31
                      32
                      33
                      34
                      35
                      36
                      37
                      38
                      39
                      40
                      41
                      42
                      43
                      44
                 Epilogue
COLLIDED  coming May 2020!
         Acknowledgements

7
                          Playlist





                     “God’s Plan” – Drake

            “High Horse” – Kacey Musgraves

             “HUMBLE.”  – Kendrick Lamar

           “I Think He Knows” – Taylor Swift

      “Antisocial” – Ed Sheeran and Travis Scott

         “Mixed  Emotions” – Emily Weisband

                    “Animals” – Maroon 5

               “Bailando” – Enrique Iglesias

                       “Torn” – Ava Max

“Sorry (Latino Remix)” – Justin Bieber ft. J. Balvin

        “Never Be the Same” – Camila Cabello

             “Dusk Till Dawn” – Zayn ft. Sia

        “Locked Out of Heaven” – Bruno Mars

                    “Proud” – Marshmello

                    “Anywhere” – Rita Ora

          “Die a Happy Man” – Thomas Rhett

8
Prologue

9
                                                    Noah







Two   Years     Earlier





I inhale deeply, welcoming the smell of rubber and engine exhaust before I
pull down the visor on my helmet. Gloved hands grip the steering wheel of
my Bandini  Formula  1 race car, my  fingers  trembling from  the  engine’s
vibrations while  the metal hood rattles. The Abu Dhabi  Grand Prix crowd
bursts with excitement as the crew pulls  off my  tire  warmers. Yesterday’s
successful qualifier sets me up in  a first-place grid  spot, and as long as I
don’t fuck it up, the World Championship title will  be mine for the taking.
    One  by  one, red  lights  illuminate   above me, shining  off   the hood’s
glossy red paint. Fans silently wait. Lights shut off to signal the start of the
Grand Prix. I press against the throttle, and my car rushes down the straight
road before  I  pull  up  to  the first  turn.  Tires  skid  across the pavement,
squeals sounding off behind me from other drivers. But I suffer from tunnel
vision on the track. It’s just me and the road.
    “Noah,  I want  to let you know  Liam Zander’s behind you, followed  by
Jax Kingston  and  Santiago Alatorre.  Keep  up the  pace and  mind  your
turns.” The team principal’s voice carries over the radio in my helmet.
    I   stay  defensive of   my  position,  making  it   difficult   for   anyone to
overtake my   car  at  the  turns.  The  hum  of   the  engine fills   me  with
exhilaration as I speed down another straight at over two hundred miles per
hour. Fans scream as I pass them. My  foot presses on the brake seconds
before I make another turn, soft tires screeching against the asphalt. Music
to my ears.
    The  first  few  laps  of  the  race go  without  a hitch.  Adrenaline  flows
through my body as Liam’s car comes up next to mine at one of the curves,
the recognizable steel-gray paint glistening under the desert sun. His engine
roars. I pull  a risky  move, pushing on the  brake a few seconds later than
recommended for a curb. Metal trembles as the right tires lift off the ground

10
before slamming back down. Liam pulls back, unable to pass me, as my car
surges forward.
    A  mechanic talks into the radio. “That  was a dangerous turn. Relax out
there, you still have fifty-two more laps to go. No reason to drive cocky.”
    I   chuckle  at the  advice.  After  a  grueling  season fighting  off   Liam,
Santiago, and Jax, I have one last Grand Prix  between me and the World
Championship win.
    “Santiago cut in  front of Liam  at the last turn. Don’t underestimate him,
he wants the win.” More chatter echoes through the radio.
    Speak of the devil, Santiago’s royal blue car shows up in my side mirror.
I shake my head as my car hugs another turn. He acts like a young shit who
tries to show off  a little  too much, attempting to make a name for himself
with his team and the F1 circuit. His skills are decent for a new guy, but one
too many close calls during this race season make me hesitant to let him get
close.
    The fucker  races right up to my rear wing, closing  the gap between our
cars—unwise for  the narrow  set of   twists coming  up.  My  heart  pumps
rapidly. Hands  clench  around the  steering wheel  as I  take  a  few  deep
breaths. Inhale, exhale—yoga  shit.  I  don’t  fold  on  my  first-place  spot,
having no interest in letting Santiago overtake my car. Gray pavement blurs
past me. On the next straight road, Santiago pulls up to my side, our wheels
nearly touching. Just a few inches apart.
    Both  engines rev as the accelerators hit their maximum. I push into first
place again at the next turn, my front wing creeping ahead of his.
    Fuck me.
    Instead of Santiago jerking back, he speeds up. Motherfucking idiot.
    The whole situation happens in slow motion, like a movie, playing frame
by frame. Me, a useless bystander. Bandini’s team principal yells in my ear
about pulling back, but the sound of crunching metal tells me I’m too late.
    Santiago’s car makes contact with mine at about one hundred and ninety
miles per hour, a catastrophic hit I won’t recover from. I curse as the wheels
of my car  lift  off the  ground and I end up airborne. Fucking flying   before
making contact with the road.
    My   race car  flips  over  twice  and drags across the pavement, sparks
flying around my head, cement within touching distance. Thank fuck for the
protective halo. The shrill sound of scraping steel hurts my ears until my car

11
stops moving. Ragged breaths leave my lungs, pushing  through my  tight
throat.
    “Noah,  are you okay? Any possible injuries? The safety team is on their
way.”
    “Negative  on any injuries. That piece of shit fucking hit me, knocked me
out like  a fucking  bumper  car.” Anger  courses through me at Santiago’s
carelessness. I plan on punching him the moment he enters the Cool Down
room after the Prix. Knock that pretty boy smile right off his face.
    “Oh,  shit! Noah, brace yourself!”
    A  chill  runs down my spine. Unable to move with my body trapped, I sit
while Jax’s  car swerves before ramming into  mine,  the turn  from  earlier
making me vulnerable to another hit. Holy shit. My  body shudders and my
head painfully  bounces against the  headrest while  our  cars spin  out  of
control. The hit jerks me, my body aching in ways I didn’t think possible.
    I  can kiss my  Championship win  goodbye. All  thanks to Santiago and
his stupidity,  pulling   a  move  he shouldn’t  have  to  get  seconds ahead.
Fucking reckless of him.  My  head clouds as adrenaline wears off and my
body gives in to the pain.
    “Fuck   you, Santiago. Enjoy  your  Championship  win  because it’ll  be
your last.”  I don’t  give  a shit about everyone hearing my team radio.  Let
fans and him know I  hate his guts. Santiago can act like hot shit now, but
I’ll  come back for him. Asshole started a fight he won’t win.
    Black  spots fog my  vision, the  combination of being  upside down and
being hit twice is too much for  my body to handle. I’m  fucking helpless as
the safety crew works  to situate my  car right-side up. I  stew in  my  toxic
mood and smack my hands against the steering wheel to the hammering of
my heart.
    I  grunt at paramedics who check for any injuries.  My  body gets an all-
clear with  nothing to  report except for  a bruised  ego and blood pressure
through the roof. The safety team drops me off back at the Bandini  suites,
and I surge past the pit crew, not interested in pleasantries or fake claps on
the back  telling  me how  everything  will   be okay.  I  don’t  want  to hear
people say how I’ll win the Championship next year.
    I  take the steps up to my suite two at a time, ready for who waits behind
the doors. My  lungs burn from  taking a  deep breath. Fuck, more like  ten
breaths, in and out, the rhythm finally calming me.

12
    I  open  the door  to  find  two  people I’d  rather  not see anytime  soon.
Preferably not within  the  next ten years, give  or take. My   dad paces the
small suite, his  broad shoulders commanding the space, chest heaving in
and out to the tempo of  his feet. His  dark hair looks  disheveled for once,
and his deep blue eyes narrow at me. Mother dearest parks herself on a gray
couch. Her icy eyes don’t meet mine as she stares at her nails. Blonde hair
perfectly coifed, her  body is posed against the cushions like the  has-been
model she is. Lucky for  her, she sunk her claws into my  dad and snagged
the ultimate  prize of  a  child  with  a  famous F1  racer. She hit  the DNA
jackpot with a son who rivals the man she married.
    Quite  the family, right? A  broken, mangled history of missed birthdays,
uncelebrated holidays, and empty  bleachers at most Formula  races. The
only  reason they  both  attended this  Prix   was because Dad  wanted  to
reminisce while  Mom   showed off  to  her  friends  how  grand life   is  for
someone who birthed a racing all-star. Neither one came for me.
    “What  the fuck  was that?” My  dad’s voice grates across my skin like a
knife. His pointed eyes cut into mine, assessing for any signs of weakness.
He suffers from resting dick  face with  wrinkles marring  the sensitive skin
near his eyes. Unfortunately for me, I look like him. Dark hair with a wave,
blue eyes that challenge the Caribbean ocean, and a tall frame that stands
toe to toe against him.
    I  place a palm against my race suit. “Well, shit. Someone told me I was
driving for a top F1 team, but maybe I shouldn’t have believed them.”
    “Someone  told me  you  were supposed to be a  World  Champion this
year, but maybe I  shouldn’t  have believed them.”  My  dad’s  voice snaps
back.
    Ah, there’s the viper we all know and hate. See, my dad may be a legend
to everyone in the F1 community, but to me, he’s a snake straight from the
pits of hell.  One sent from the Devil  himself. A  venomous man who does
nothing but scold me, funding  my career with  the lovely  bonus of tearing
me down whenever he has the chance. But in front of everyone else, he acts
like  a doting  dad  who  supports my  racing  career, both  financially  and
emotionally. He could win an Oscar for Best Supporting Jackass.
    “Scared  of me  contesting your three-title  standing? Thought you’d  be
happy with  me staying in  your shadow, forever  trying to  catch up to  the
legendary Nicholas Slade.” Distaste colors my voice.

13
    He  closes the gap between us and grabs me like the good old days. His
fists tighten  around  my  race suit,  eyes barely  concealing  the rage  that
bubbles within.   I  can  tell  he  battles  between hitting   me  and verbally
sparring with me.
    I  roll  my eyes, feigning indifference despite my heart rapidly beating in
my chest. “Your  predictability  bores me. What are you going to  do? Slap
me around to remember how much of a dick you are?” My voice stays firm.
    My  dad and I have a tumultuous history at best. The first three years of
my life  were fun, but  ever since I began karting, it  was game over. Ironic
how the best years of my life became the worst. Gone was the dad who took
me to the park to ride my bike or throw a football around. Every year he got
worse when all I wanted to  do was please him, pushing myself to become
one of the  best drivers in  karts. Then it  became Formula phases, forever
seeking his love and approval at the  expense of my childhood. Desperate
for anything to stop his private rituals. Fans don’t know the real me, the shit
I dealt with  to impress my  dad, the weekly beatings I received if  I  placed
anything below first. My ass never met a belt I liked.
    Slaps became punches that upgraded into verbal lashings once I reached
his height.  My  dad  stripped away  my  childhood  at  the expense of  my
humanity. Because to survive the  worst of  them, you  eventually  become
them.
    I  stare into my dad’s eyes and look at the monster who made me. He got
his wish.  To please him  and protect  myself,  I  became everything he is,
minus smacking people around. I’m an asshole with walls  higher than the
Grand fucking Canyon.
    He  leers at  me, his  words  a snarl  against his clenched teeth.  “I  lost
thousands because of your shitty-ass display out there. Congratulations on
being runner-up. Wonder how it feels to kiss a whole year of your life away.
You can’t live  in my  shadow when you don’t deserve to breathe the same
air as me.”
    His  anger doesn’t faze my mother, who sits there and watches us, eyes
cold and dead, just like her personality. A useless waste of space who plays
the role of a mother whenever convenient. She chooses to turn a blind eye
every damn time he gets this way, indifference  evident in  her blank gaze.
I’d  honestly  forget  she talks  except for   when  she calls  me to  ask  for
exclusive tickets and backstage passes.

14
    “Then  you should step away. Don’t want to  get near me because I hear
being a loser is contagious.” I grip his hands and push him the fuck off me.
He doesn’t back down, keeping eye to eye with me as he sneers.
    “You’re  such a fuck-up, ever since you were born. The only reason you
got this far  was because of me and my investments since no other person
would  have sponsored your  sorry  ass. A  pompous brat  who  acted out,
pretending to be tough when you really cried into your pillow at night about
a mommy who didn’t love you and a daddy who beat your ass weekly.”
    I   shrug,  hoping  to  come off   careless. Inside,  my  blood  burns  hot,
edginess creeping up my spine in the hopes of a fight—an unlucky genetic
inheritance from this man.
    “Darn,  Dad, sorry. Would  you like  to wipe  your eyes with  a couple of
hundred-dollar bills?  What  a disappointment  to  raise someone who  has
three World Championship titles already.”
    “The  disappointment wasn’t raising you. It’s  seeing the pathetic excuse
of a man you’ve become. Enjoy your second-place parade. I know it’s been
a while for  me, but I heard the first-place view on the podium  is best.” He
sends me an evil smile before stepping away.
    Check-fucking-mate.

15
1

16
                                                    Maya






“Maya  Alatorre,  Bachelor  of  Arts  in  Communications.”  The  announcer
states my degree in both English and Spanish. My parents and Santi beam
at me from  their seats off  to the side of  the stage, waving signs amongst
other parents of graduates from the Universitat de Barcelona. I  clutch the
most expensive piece of  paper in  my  hands, the  rough texture  pressing
against my fingertips, reminding me of my efforts to graduate today.
    I   sit  myself  back in  the  sea of  students cloaked  in  cheap polyester
gowns. After a few speeches, we move our tassels to the side, signifying the
end of our university days. Five grueling years and two major changes later,
I can  happily  say I  graduated. Turns out  I  wasn’t cut  out for  a  biology
degree; I fainted during  a dissection lab when my partner cut  into a baby
pig’s stomach. And pre-law didn’t exactly work  out for me; I  threw up in a
nearby trash can  during my  first   debate, forfeiting  before  the questions
began. People would count these restarts as failures, but I think they built
character. That and resilience for messing up.
    It   took   me  two   internships  to   discover  my   interest  in   film   and
production. I   add myself  to  the  unemployed post-grad statistic  because
finding jobs in film  is a lot harder than I thought.
    My  family  meets me outside, the views of Barcelona greeting us while
the cool December air brushes against my skin, which is  poorly protected
by the cheap grad outfit.  We all  pull  in for  a group  hug before they take
pictures of me. I get a boatload of congratulations and kisses, along with a
slip of an envelope from my brother, Santiago.
    “For  the graduate. Took you long enough.” He sends me a smile before
smacking the top of my cap. We look similar yet different, thank God. Dark,
thick hair  matches our light  brown eyes, long lashes, and olive skin.  Our
similarities  end there. Santi  inherited a  tall  gene from  a  distant relative
while I  stopped growing by eighth grade. He rocks week-old stubble and a
goofy smile while I prefer a more mischievous grin that matches the glint in
my eyes. He works out seven days a week while I count climbing up stairs
to get to class as my daily workout.
    Santi’s phone rings and he steps away to answer it.

17
    My  mother poses me and takes more pictures. She and I look alike, all
honey eyes, short stature, and hair with enough wave and volume to look
good when I wake up.
    “We’re  extremely proud of  you. Both of  our babies are out doing good
things in the world,”  my mom says as she snaps a picture of me rolling my
eyes. Her accent has a lull to  it, a  product of learning  English from  hotel
guests at her job.
    I  groan  when she smacks a  big  kiss on  my  cheek, leaving  behind a
smudge of her lipstick.
    My  dad  mumbles about her needing to treat me like  a grown  woman.
Look at me, now called a mature adult, all  at the toss of a graduation cap.
His smile  reaches his brown eyes, wrinkles creasing at  the corners as he
looks down  at me. He  has thick  hair that  competes with Santi’s, a  short
beard, and a lean frame. Santi looks like a younger, more muscular version
of our dad.
    “Who  wants to grab dinner?” my dad says while rubbing his belly.
    Santi steps back toward us, looking paler than usual. He comes up to my
side and whispers into my ear, “Sorry  about this. But  they’ll  get pissed if
they find out from someone who isn’t me.”
    I  look up at him, confused why he needs to say sorry.
    Santi  takes a deep breath before he breaks out a smile. “My agent just
told me Bandini offered me a contract for next season.”
    Well, shit.
    Santi  doesn’t need to steal my  thunder when he robs the  whole damn
storm.





I place Santi’s green smoothie on the table next to his workout bench. Four
measly ounces of juice  mock  me, the  goopy evidence supporting how  I
belong nowhere  near a  kitchen for   the unforeseeable future.  Especially
since green liquid still  drips from the kitchen ceiling.  What a mess. It’s all
fun and games until I forget to put the cap on the blender, making contents
splatter everywhere, including my hair and clothes.
    “I   don’t  need you  waiting  on  me hand and  foot.  You should  be out
having fun because we won’t be back home for  a while.”  He grunts as he

18
lifts a weight above his chest.
    “I  want to  make myself useful and not feel like I’m  taking advantage of
you for  a free place to  stay.” I  fidget with  my  hands while he counts his
lifts, his deep exhales filling the silence.
    Sleek  equipment gleams under the overhead lights, a  testament to his
commitment to Formula 1. His new home is a far cry from the bedroom we
shared while growing up. This new one has six bedrooms, a personal gym,
a mini movie theater, and an Olympic-sized pool. A whopping six thousand
square feet.
    He sighs. “Money isn’t  a worry anymore.”
    “I  know,  I know. But I  want to make a name for myself because I can’t
live in your shadow forever.” My hand itches to twirl a piece of my hair, but
I resist the nervous tick.
    I   don’t  think  I’ll   ever forget  how  his  bank account  has a ridiculous
number of zeros. The first paycheck from F1 paid for my college in full. No
questions asked. Santi didn’t blink when he signed the check like he expects
to provide for  our whole family  now that he’s made it  big, which can’t  be
further from the truth. We appreciate everything Santi does. Him wanting to
help in whatever way he can comes from a meaningful place rather than a
sense of obligation.
    When  we were younger, our parents worked two jobs to save up every
penny for Santi’s racing career. My  dad repaired karts as a side gig while
my mom  cleaned houses on weekends. Unlike most wealthy “trust  fund”
kids in  F1, my  parents are middle-class on a good payday. Santi made a
name for himself  without  the financial backing  or a famous pedigree. He
finally  has sponsors who believe in him  and his skills,  making life  easier
and racing a hell of a lot more fun.
    “I   want you to come to  my races this season. You can take the year to
figure out  what you want  to do next.  Plus it’ll   be fun because this is our
chance to finally travel  together.” He sends me a goofy smile from behind
his barbell.
    Santi gets to live  out his fantasy of being a top F1 racer with Bandini—
the top team in the sport. Driving for them is my brother’s dream come true.
I didn’t  hesitate to say yes when he asked me to join him because my big
brother is   basically  a  superstar. His  bombshell  of  a  revelation  at  my
graduation a couple weeks ago stung, but I pushed past it because he had a

19
valid reason of  not  wanting us  to find  out  from  paparazzi. Unlike  other
siblings, I don’t mind sharing the limelight.
    “That’s  the plan. Your assistant sent me all the travel info and bookings.”
    It  feels odd to say he has an assistant in the first place. She runs all his
gigs, like  checking in  on his  hotel accommodations, making sure he  has
weekly groceries, and booking sponsorships.
    “Did  you get the camera I picked out for you?”
    I  have  no idea  how to  pay  back his  generosity, especially with  such
expensive gifts. He still buys me things even though he pays for everything.
Lately, I struggle between feelings of guilt and gratitude.
    “Yes, thanks again. I have it all set up, and I’m pumped to vlog. I already
bought a hand-held tripod to film F1 stuff.” I smile down at him.
    He  doesn’t miss a beat, lifting the weight over his chest as he continues
to chat. “Can’t  wait to  watch the videos once you start. And  you have all
your stuff packed up?”
    “Yes,  Dad, I got  everything ready two days ago like  you asked.” I  roll
my eyes.
    He  chuckles as his almond-shaped eyes look into mine. “I hope I won’t
have to put up with this  attitude all season long. I can’t keep up with  your
teenage hormones.”
    “You're  a year older  than me. Relax with  throwing  the teenager word
around. Any hormone issues are a thing of the past. I’m  twenty-three, not
fifteen.”
    His  body shudders. Good. That’s what he gets for not thinking  through
his words. He needs to watch what he says since film crews will follow him
around all the time.
    He  gets up and wipes down his gym equipment because that’s the kind
of guy he  is: put-together, organized, and responsible. Respectable people
clean their workout equipment, making sure to put everything back where it
belongs, while people like me never enter the gym to begin with.
    Where  Santi’s dependable and secure, I  tend to  have good intentions
with  poor execution.  I  respect my  brother’s life  decisions,  but I’m   in  a
transitional phase at the moment. So I get to travel  the world, learn about
myself, and grow up. Our family knows I have to pull it together eventually.
And I most definitely will.  But like  a fine wine, I’m taking my time.
    My  time includes sipping drinks by the pool while Santi competes across
the globe in  twenty-one different  races. No, I’m   kidding.  Like  any other

20
decent European, I love F1, which means I’ll cheer him on every step of the
way, or wheel rotation. But you get what I mean.
    My   brother and I  did  everything together while  growing  up.  His kart
races were what we all  did as a family   activity, and no  one was shocked
when he became an F1 racer—all at a world-record-breaking age of twenty-
one years old. I can’t  imagine the gratification  Santi experiences knowing
that Bandini  realizes his potential  and wants to capitalize  on it.  His  new
contract reinforces his lifetime efforts in the racing community, representing
a new chapter in his driving career.
    Basically, my big bro has the talent and drive. Pun intended.
    It’s  in Santi’s weight room that I make a promise to him.
    “I  solemnly swear I’ll  be up to good.”
    His  eyebrows draw together. “Did you quote Harry Potter to me?”
    “Not  really. I changed it up so it’s all me.”
    He snickers at me. “You’re a piece of work.”
    Oh, sweet brother of mine, don’t we both know it.
    Our   parents  show   up  an   hour   later  for   Sunday   dinner.  Mom’s
homecooked paella invades my nose while sangria coats my tongue. They
beam when Santi and I tell them how I plan to join him for the race season,
pride and happiness flowing off them.
    “All   your hard work  has paid off, including  those long days on the dirt
tracks before you moved up to the big leagues with the Formula divisions.
We appreciate all the sacrifices you made, including school.” My  dad tips
his glass before taking a sip of his drink.
    Our parents like to share their appreciation for everything Santi has done
since he gained his massive contract with Bandini, including paying off the
rest of their mortgage, setting up a savings account for them, and sending
them on a vacation. More selfless acts from him. An uncontrollable pang of
jealousy  runs  through  me  at  his  ability   to   care for   our  family.   The
uncertainty of  never  living  up  to  anything he  does intimidates  me. His
success makes me happy—don’t get me wrong—but I’m nervous about not
accomplishing anything close to his greatness.
    “We  can’t wait to visit  Bandini when you compete in Barcelona for your
home race.” My  mom claps her hands, a gesture I tend to copy. Her eyes
shine under the  chandelier in  Santi’s dining  room  while  her brown  hair
flows around her.

21
    Santi  smiles at our parents. “I  can’t  wait to  be back and competing in
Spain. Home races are the biggest races for drivers.”
    We all clink  our glasses to Santi’s words.
    “It’s   great that you’ll   follow  him  around and keep him  company. I’m
sure it’s  lonely   on  the road.  Plus,  you’ll   have your   vlog,”  Mom   says
between bites of her food.
    I  love her for  including me in the conversation. She supports my whole
process, sending me different articles and videos about marketing  myself
while building an audience.
    I  don’t intend on following  him around from country to  country because
that’s lame. My  ideas mean something to me, but vlogs  can’t compare to
driving around in the fastest and most expensive cars in the world.
    “I   can film  everything because Santi bought me a camera. Hopefully I
meet people along the way and make connections because I want to keep
active while he’s busy.” I hold my chin up high, exuding confidence I don’t
entirely feel at the moment.
    “We’re  happy you are going with him. Your mom and I worry about you
and hope you find your way. Use that communications degree to its fullest
potential.” My  dad runs a hand through his gray hair. He  means well, and
since my previous track history  isn’t the greatest, I can’t  judge him for  it.
Doubt seeps into my bones at his comment, but I push it away.
    “Santi’s  lucky  his  life  panned out  like  he wanted. He’s  an all-star  at
twenty-four years old. I’m only twenty-three, which means I have the world
ahead of me.”  I  shoot  my  parents a smile,  ignoring  the  sense of panic
running through me at disappointing them.
    “I  went over a few ground rules with Maya, you know, to keep her out of
trouble. God forbid  I  find  her drunk and crying  on a bathroom floor  to  a
Jonas Brothers song.”
    I  throw  my cloth napkin  at Santi. “That happened one time! It  was my
birthday and they had just announced they were getting back together. I was
super emotional, okay? Feelings hit me all at once, right there while I  was
washing my hands.”
    Everyone chuckles at the table.
    “And  I told  her not to hand her camera over to random strangers because
of the last incident.” Santi’s eyes shine with humor.
    I  withhold the urge to roll  my eyes. “How was I supposed to expect that
a random guy would run off  with  my phone when we asked for a picture?

22
Who even does that? It goes against every code of ethics ever written.” To
be fair, some situations are a consequence of me being in the wrong place at
the wrong time, while trusting a shady person.
    “People  without  morals, that’s who.  You should be  careful with  those
types when you’re gone. People need to go to church more.” My mom does
a sign of the cross for good measure.
    Leave  it to  my mom  to think  religion  will  solve everything.  Bless her
heart.
    I  enjoy the rest of dinner with my family, grateful when the conversation
sways away from me. No one gets how tough it is to live  up to everything
my brother does. Not that I  want to, but still,  Santi leaves behind colossal
shoes my whole body  can’t fill.   But  I  want to  push negativity  aside and
enjoy the trips we have planned.
    Because you   know  what’s  worse  than  complaining  about  your  big
brother?
    Complaining  about a big brother who is so damn perfect all the time.

23
2

24
                                                    Noah






I toss a pillow  over my  head to block out any  light streaming through the
window. Sheets rustle next to me and a warm hand finds my dick under the
covers.
    “Okay,  this is the time  you grab your stuff  and go.” I  point to  the door
while  my   other  arm  holds   the  pillow   on  my   face.  Please  don’t  be
confrontational.
    “You’re  kicking  me out of bed while  my hand is on your cock? We had
sex three hours ago.” She fails to hide her disbelief.
    She’s smart and good with time.
    “Yup,  last  night  was fun  and all  but  I  have to  get up  for  practice. I
enjoyed it. Thanks.”
    She  snatches the pillow  off  my  face,  revealing a  feisty  woman with
blonde hair that’s a ruffled mess and her makeup smeared. I smirk at a job
well done.
    Her eyes shoot daggers at me, matching the sneer on her face. “You’re as
unbelievable as they say. Are you always such a dick to people?”
    I  blink  a couple of times, not in  the mood for her attitude. Talk about a
complete one-eighty from last night. Go figure.
    “I’m   glad my reputation precedes me. You overstayed your welcome; be
sure to be gone by the time I’m out of the shower.” No use staying in bed. I
get up with my dick hanging out and my ass on display. Her lips gape apart
as I close the door on her face, ending our conversation. They always leave
by the time I get out anyway.
    I  make it a long shower to avoid seeing the blonde chick again. Amber-
Aly-whatever  her  name  is—shit  if   I  know   since they  eventually   blur
together, becoming one mindless fuck after another. Now with  the season
starting again, I won’t be drinking  like I  did last night. I  have to stay sharp
and keep the sponsors happy. Getting drunk isn’t  a habit  for  me anyway
because I have to keep myself in top physical form.
    I’m  one of  Formula 1’s best, after all, which  means I have an image to
keep up.

25
    See, to answer the chick’s question, I’m a dick. But  I don’t exactly  hide
it. People like her don’t  sleep with people like me in hopes that I’ll  cuddle
and say sweet nothings  after a  good screw. I   find  it  hard to  see where
women like her come from, getting all flustered after a good lay, calling me
all types of curse words. Can’t help being the “fuck them and chuck them”
type. But ladies know the score, lining up  at nightclubs to salivate all over
my Gucci loafers for a chance to go home with me. They use me as much as
I use them. A quick, meaningless fuck to let off steam.
    And  I have a lot of steam to let out.
    A  couple weeks ago, Bandini hired Santiago Alatorre as a second racer.
My rival  is now my teammate. A scrappy little shit who likes to  go balls to
the wall, consequences be damned.
    I  can respect the fact that he drives well, but he has a lot to learn about
the sport. A  shit ton  of lessons I’ll   happily teach. Like  when to  back the
fuck off, or how to apologize for a nearly fatal crash. Crap like that.
    Unbelievable how Bandini hired him despite our rocky history.
    So I did what any reasonable person would do to pass time during winter
break. I got shit-faced last night, where one drink turned into five and here I
am, being called a dick by  another chick. Some consider me nice. I make
sure she comes multiple  times  before  I  do  because my nanny  raised a
gentleman after all, no thanks to my parents.
    But  I   can’t  blame my  terrible  mood  on a  blonde  chick  with  a sour
attitude. My anger is all due to Bandini’s new contract with Santiago. Now I
have to share my team with  a  guy I  don’t  even like,  our rivalry  burning
strong since he hit me during the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. What a wreck, my
car unrecognizable after that crash, retired and bent out of shape. My loss
was Santiago’s gain. He won a World Championship thanks to my collision.
Doubt he loses sleep over it.
    Santiago  comes across as  deceptively careless. Even  in  those  tense
situations, he calculatingly thinks about the moves he makes on the course,
doing anything to end up on the podium. Ballsy motherfucker.
    I  have little  respect for him  since our collision,  but  I don’t  blame him
like people say I do. At  the time I did. But  after lots of thinking,  I came to
the conclusion that he didn’t cost me the World Championship. That was all
me. The real reason I can’t stand him is because his rashness almost landed
me in the hospital, a memory not easily forgotten.

26
    I  plan on playing civil  with him since we have to act like teammates. We
don’t need to  compare dick sizes to see who’s the  best when my driving
does the talking. He  gets to come onto  my  team and into  my house and
show his skills. Meaning  I can sit  back and relax while he proves himself
worthy of  the money they  paid him  this year. It  will   be intriguing  to see
where it goes and who performs better. No more excuses, because an even
playing field means the better driver will win. And we all  know who that is.
    My  phone rings on my dresser. Father.
    I  battle  between picking  up the  phone and letting  it  go to  voicemail.
Deciding on the latter, I step away before the phone rings again. Clever man
knows I avoid any contact with him. Not wanting  to prolong the inevitable,
I take the call.
    “Dad.  How  are you?” I shuffle the phone between my shoulder and ear
while I grab my workout bag.
    “I   read the news. Bandini added that child  to the team. What  are they
thinking? He’s barely proven himself.” His gruff  voice reverberates through
the small speaker, skipping over pleasantries.
    “Nice   to hear from  you too.”  My  words pack  their usual bite  because
asshole genes run in the family.
    “Cut  the shit, Noah. This is serious, especially after he screwed you over
before. You’ve got to  stay sharp this season and not let him get the upper
hand.”
    “We  can let the crash go since it was forever ago. I’m not worried about
a racer who got lucky once.” I double-check that the chick from earlier left,
not wanting another encounter with her. All clear. I grab my keys and lock
up my Monaco apartment.
    “I   didn’t  invest  a ton  of  money into  that company  for  them to  mess
around with your career. If they think a kid is going to get the best resources
without showing his worth… What a sad mistake.”
    I  rub  my eyes. “We can see how he does before you  pop off  on some
Bandini rep. I doubt he can beat me like that again since it  was a fluke. A
lucky hit where I lost control.”
    “Damn   straight he won’t.   Don’t  fuck  it  up  again; you  don’t  want to
crumble under pressure when you’re at the height of your career.”
    Thanks for the love, Dad.
    “Yup,  sounds like me. Talk to you later. Bye.”  I don’t  wait for his  reply
before I hang up.

27
    My  dad can’t help being an asshole, but the public likes him, so he saves
all his pent-up issues for me. He gets his way no matter what. His solutions
to problems include  money, threats, and throwing his  weight around. Me
moving across the Atlantic  Ocean hasn’t put enough distance between us.
Even with an insane time change between Europe and America, he finds a
way to contact me.
    Whatever  races he graces with his  presence end up being a shitshow.
Fans call  me  F1  royalty,  an American  Prince  because of  my  dad, the
amazing Nicholas Slade. Who is still called one of the greatest racers in F1
history. Lucky me to have him breathing down my neck about everything I
do  wrong  or  where  I  can  improve.  Yes,  he kick-started  my   career. I
appreciate every investment he’s made to help me along the way, but I race
cars every weekend, proving to him and everyone else that I’ll be a legend
too. The driving  world has changed a lot since he raced twenty years ago.
Cars I drive  today shit  on whatever hunk  of metal  he drove, making  the
sport into  what  fans love  today.  A  sport  with  drama, high  speeds, and
intense risks.
    My  phone pings from a new message.

         Dad  (12/24 10:29 a.m.): Booked my flight to Barcelona.

    Merry  fucking Christmas to you too, Dad.

28
3

29
                                                    Maya






Three months have passed since Santiago signed his new deal with Bandini
Racing. I  am  living  with   him  while  he gets  ready for  the  new  season,
making sure to keep myself busy by starting my vlog. I want to share all my
travels while I  follow  Santi around the world. My  computer is jam-packed
with research on different things to do in each city while he preps for races.
Pride surges through me at my foresight to plan.
    I  inhale  the exotic  smell of  Melbourne, Australia.  All   right,  the scent
lacks the exoticness I had hoped for. A mix of  car exhaust and airport fuel
wafts through the air since the Outback is a far reach away. Best I’ll get for
now. But  it seems foreign  enough, and I relish  in  my first  experience of
visiting a different continent.
    Professionals call  Santi’s  first  Prix  a “flyaway   race.”  I  made sure to
catch up on all the F1 terms because I don’t want fans to think of me as ill-
prepared.
    I  say “G’day mate!”  to one of the flight  attendants as I exit the plane. A
poorly executed slip of the tongue. She doesn’t look amused in the slightest
at my poor attempt to crack a joke, so I delete the saying off my phone once
I step inside the airport.
    I  keep a translated list of popular phrases from each country we visit to
prevent making myself look like a fool, at least not more than usual. Note to
self: double-check what phrases sound stupid.
    I   stretch my   sore legs  after  a  twenty-hour  flight  from   Madrid,  my
muscles thanking me for the special attention. Santi grabs my luggage off
the carousel while I find the Bandini town car.
    We get dropped off at the hotel where the team stays. I look around the
elegant lobby, distracting myself with a funky art piece while Santi talks to
the front desk. He texts his assistant to check each accommodation for two-
room suites because he tends to be a needy man-child.
    Our  suite looks modern and fresh, with a minimalist color  palette and a
balcony overlooking  the track. I  throw  myself on  the living  room  couch.
Comfortable cushions practically swallow me whole like  a welcoming hug
after a long day.

30
    “I  have to go to  a couple sponsor meetings before working out kinks in
the new car. You’ll be good without me?” His brown eyes gaze down at me
as he places a Bandini baseball cap over his head.
    “Sure.  I have plans for the day anyway. Don’t worry about me.”  I shoot
him a toothy grin.
    “I’ll   always worry about you. You are a handful.”
    I  send him  a mock-offended look.  “No  need to throw  around charged
words.”
    He  waves at me  over his  shoulder before exiting  the suite.  I throw  a
pillow at the door as it closes, missing my opportunity by a few seconds.
    I  take in  my surroundings. The suite can’t compare to Santi’s previous
digs, our  upgrade having a  television the  size of  my  bed back  home, a
dining table fit for eight people, and a large sectional that surrounds me.
    After  changing into  my  bathing suit and grabbing my  camera, I check
out the hotel.  My  stomach grumbles during  my  tour, encouraging me to
grab a quick bite to eat before I head to the pool. I relax and doze off on a
lounge chair, heat from the sun enveloping me like a warm blanket, tanning
my skin. An  afternoon nap tempts me, my body giving into  jet lag despite
the regret I’ll feel later about my decision.





“I have a press conference today and I want you to come.” Santi walks into
my room and plops himself on my bed. His post-practice round makes him
a  sweaty, sticky   mess,  with   dirty  skin   contrasting  against  the  white
comforter.
    “Oh,  please come lie on my bed in your  sweaty clothes. Make yourself
at home.” My voice drips with sarcasm.
    He  ignores me as he grabs one of the pillows. I  continue to put on  my
makeup, keeping it fresh and light,  my  go-to look.  My  skin  glows in  the
mirror after my long tanning-session-turned-nap yesterday.
    He lets out a grunt. “Noah’s an ass and you keep me in check. I won’t be
an idiot  if  you’re there. Please come.”  His words  distract me, and I  stab
myself in the eyeball with  my  mascara wand. Shit. Is there a greater pain
than mascara on your eye?

31
    My   heart  accelerates at the  thought  of  Noah  Slade. He’s  hot,  in  a
devilishly handsome kind of way. Messy hair  so dark it looks black,  sharp
cheekbones that can shave ice,  and  lips  every  woman can  envy. I   see
pictures of him everywhere—ads, commercials, gossip mags. You name it,
he’s been on it. Not  to mention  how my  brother has stood at the podium
with him  multiple  times. I  may have watched one or twenty times  on my
TV at home. Hard to resist seeing Noah get showered with champagne on a
Prix podium while he beams down at the trophy in his hand.
    I  let out  a sigh. Noah’s the type of guy  you don’t  bring home to mom;
he’s the one you screw around with before you find the guy you finally take
home to mom, ensuring her you’ve moved on from your wild ways. His list
of past partners happens to be longer  than my grocery  list  and to-do list
combined. Gross yet oddly fascinating how women like that.
    “You  do understand you’re an adult, right? How on earth do I keep you
in check?”
    “Because I  won’t  say anything too nasty for  my sister’s ears.” He  bats
his long, dark  lashes at me in  a ridiculous  gesture that softens my heart.
Damn him  and his  goofiness. I  fall  for  it  every single  time, a  victim  to
Santi’s boyish ways.
    “Your   innocent ploy  is  nothing short  of terrible.  Is  that how  you  get
laid?”
    He  throws  a pillow   straight at  my  face, smudging  my mascara even
more.
    “Ugh,  you’re messing up my makeup! Fine, I’ll  go. But  get off my bed.
Now.”
    He hops off  my bed triumphantly because I fell for his plan. Hook, line,
and sinker.
    “See you later. I’ll  send up someone to grab you when it’s time.” He taps
away at his phone.
    “The  things  I  do for  you. I’ll   try  not to  fall  asleep on the side  of the
panel, but no promises.”
    He lets out a deep laugh. “F1 panels are juicy. You’ll enjoy it, I know it.”
He leaves with a smile plastered on his face. I can’t  tell if  he means to be
serious when he rubs his hands together like an evil genius. Shady side eye
included.
    I  wrap  up getting ready. An  attendant shows me the way  to the  press
conference area where my brother waves at me from  the panel table. My

32
grin mirrors  his own. Warmth fills  my  heart at seeing him up there living
his dream, wearing signature scarlet Bandini gear—everything he’s wanted
since he was a kid.
    I  snap a quick  picture for  my  Instagram story. Hate to  break it  to the
thirsty females out there, but  I’m  his number-one fan. After  fiddling  with
my phone, I glance up at the panel, my eyes meeting Noah’s blue ones—a
strikingly  beautiful color framed by dark lashes and brows. His plump lips
turn down as he checks me out. My body heats at his appraisal, aware of the
beautiful  human in  front  of  me  because I’m  dumb  not  blind.  I  find   it
impossible to calm my racing heart, thumping against my rib cage, as I take
him in. Fuck me. I don’t  think I’ve  ever thought of a guy as gorgeous until
now.
    He rakes a hand through his thick, unruly strands. His hair looks like he
continuously runs his fingers through the locks all day. Corded arms lay on
the table, revealing tan skin and large hands, taking my mind to dirty places.
Noah’s lean kind of muscular is ideal for racing. Shit, the kind of  muscular
perfect for  fucking  against  a door,  in  a shower, or  on  a counter.  Vivid
images fly through my head of Noah in  compromising positions. My body
hums with excitement at the sight of  Noah smirking  at me, my lower  half
clearly not understanding the difference between danger and lust. Turns out
press conferences offer more eye candy than I thought.
    I  lick  my lips at the sight of his arms. Nothing makes a girl swoon quite
like  a guy  dedicated to his  gym regimen,  but this  guy is  more likely   to
commit to his gym than to another girl. He notices my reaction and winks at
me. My  cheeks flush at his attention, an embarrassing display that makes
my attraction noticeable. Can I be any more obvious?
    Frustration rushes through me, washing away thoughts of his lips against
mine and his hands in my hair. How on earth will I survive a season around
someone who looks like him?
    God plays cruel jokes on me. Just when I promised to be good, he wants
me to fall right  into the arms of the devil. Men like  Noah are only built for
wickedness.
    I  force my eyes away and try to find  something interesting in the room.
Oh look, a middle-aged man setting up his microphone. Riveting stuff. The
same man glares at me before he grumbles something about hot chicks not
being allowed in the press room.

33
    Noah’s deep rumbling laugh sends a shiver up my spine. Since when do
laughs sound sexy? My   body  finds  it  difficult   to  ignore  him,  my  eyes
wanting to pull back to him like  a magnet. I refrain because I don’t want to
lead him on. But  he makes my body  stand to attention, my posture never
looking better.
    My  interest in the reporter appears short-lived once questions come from
all different  directions.  Each journalist  reeks of  desperation to  add their
tidbit, enthusiastically raising  their hands every time a  round of questions
wraps up.
    One question makes me pause my Instagram scrolling.
    “What   have   you  two   been  doing  to   prevent  another  Abu   Dhabi
situation?”
    Ugh, this  again? Aren’t there juicier stories to bring up? Noah seems to
share my same sentiment, his low groan permeating through the crowd and
gaining my attention.
    “Are  we seriously bringing  up a race from two years ago? That’s below
you, Harold. Find  fresher drama to bring  up because your questions bore
me.”
    Turns out Harold is  the same reporter I was staring at earlier. My mouth
drops open, shocked Noah Slade knows these reporters by name. He has no
shame calling them out.
    But  Harold  refuses to  let  Noah  off  easily, especially  after a  tongue-
lashing.
    “One  would  assume the competition is back in full  force.  How does it
feel to be working closely with  someone you publicly announced as a rival
on the track?” Harold licks  his lips at his own line  of questioning. Must be
proud.
    Noah’s  jaw  ticks,  accentuating razor-sharp cheekbones. His icy  gaze
makes  my   blood  run   cold.   “Seeing   as  we’re   teammates  now,  his
performance is contingent on my own, and vice versa. I wish Santi the best
of luck; this year will be competitive between everyone.”
    My  brother  opens his big mouth,  piggybacking off  Noah’s last words.
“We  discussed team strategies and what  situations  can be  prevented. I
highly doubt Slade will make that mistake again.”
    Santi,  so sharp in racing, so  unaware of real life.  Noah turns  his head
slowly toward  my brother. I  rub a palm across my face like  it  can rid  the
image of Noah’s  death glare and clenched jaw  from  my memory.  Abort,

34
Santi. Uncertain of who will  say what next, the media room remains silent
as reporters anxiously wait for a reply.
    Noah  faces the camera crews again. “We all learn from  mistakes here.
The  sport  is  about  growth   and personal  development  on  the  course.
Accidents happen. It’s all about what you do after that matters.”
    One point  for Noah Slade. He handles the situation like a pro who  was
well-trained by a publicist.  The rest of the press meeting remains mundane
after the spur of drama, not as juicy as my brother promised. A blessing in
disguise for him since he’s already messed up.
    Relief  floods through me when an F1 member announces the end of the
media conference. He reminds everyone about the gala being hosted tonight
in honor  of the  Bandini racers, plus  information  about a few  other press
sessions taking place after practice rounds and qualifiers. Excuses of how to
get out of those pop up in my head. Thankfully for Santi, he can do most of
them alone, minus Noah and myself.
    Noah  approaches us outside of the press building. My  skin prickles  at
our closeness, his body hulking over  my five-foot-two   frame, making me
feel smaller than usual.
    “I  don’t  know how your last team worked but let me handle the big-boy
questions. You should re-watch the tapes from Abu  Dhabi  if  you think  it
was a mistake on my  end because it sure as fuck wasn’t.  That should be
your first order of  business around here. Well, that and staying the hell out
of my way.” His fists clench together and his jaw ticks under pressure.
    “I  didn’t  mean for it to come out that way. I’m sorry. I  wasn’t thinking,”
my brother says with earnest.
    “Clearly.  You’re  new to the team and we have a system here. One that
doesn’t include stupid answers. You should ask around if  you’re  not sure
how things work.”
    “There’s  no  need to be rude  to him.  He  said sorry,”  I  snap, my eyes
meeting Noah’s cold glare. I can only take so much of his attitude when my
brother’s already said sorry. Santi  acts tough, but issues affect him  more
than most, his emotions swirling inside of him like a slow-moving tornado.
    Noah’s  sapphire eyes  trail  down  my  body.  He licks   his  bottom lip,
drawing my attention toward  them, noticing how  the bottom is fuller  than
the top. They look soft and plump. Perfectly kissable.
    Skin  heats wherever his eyes roam. I feel betrayed by the way my body
acts around him, like I can’t control the draw I have toward him.

35
    He  opens his mouth. “Side  pieces don’t come to  these types of things
either so she can stay away. Maybe you’ll be less of a dumbass.”
    My  head snaps up, waves of attraction replaced by anger. All at the flip
of a switch. He did not insinuate what I thought he did.
    Before  Santi or I  can get a word out, he continues. His  blue eyes gaze
into mine, dancing with  delight. “If  you  ever get bored of being with him,
I’m  always  free.  With   age comes  more experience.”  He  shoots  me a
ridiculously smug smile, and I can’t wait to knock it off his face.
    I  start  toward him,  wanting to  get uncomfortably  close because death
stares look  better from   inches away. Santi  grabs my   hand, halting  my
attempt to get up in Noah’s space, but he can’t stop my mouth. Oh, no. My
mouth has a mind of its own because words flow without a second thought.
    “He’s  my older brother, asshole. Can’t you see the family resemblance?
Or is the cloud of superiority around you so thick that you didn’t notice?”
    I  imagine the wheels turning in Noah’s head as he makes the connection.
His eyes dart between Santi and me, looking at our dark hair, olive skin, and
same honey-brown eyes. My head tilts to the side and I shoot him a smirk.
    His  jaw drops open and his cheeks tinge a light pink color. I gloat at his
embarrassment, mentally dancing around at my sassiness. Everyone knows
what they say about people who assume.
    “I’m   sorry, I  clearly  shouldn’t have spoken to either of  you like  that.”
His voice has a hint of  regret. I shrug, ignoring  the tug on my heart at his
remorse because I get petty when  mad. Assholes don’t  do it  for  me,  no
matter how pretty their faces are.
    My  brother offers a handshake because he acts like a real man. I try my
best to disregard how good Noah’s ass looks as he walks away, but I take a
peek because a woman can only have so much restraint. He gives me one
last look over  his shoulder before he disappears around the corner of  the
building.
    I  sigh softly, my  heart slowing down for  the first time  in an hour. Santi
gives me a quizzical  glance before we  take off  in the  opposite direction.
Looks like tonight’s gala just got a lot more interesting.

36
4

37
                                                    Noah






I mull over the conversation with Santiago and his sister while I eat lunch in
the Bandini area. Santi has a sibling I had no clue existed. Where was she
throughout his racing debut? I feel like I  would’ve recognized her. Instead,
I made myself look like an asshole on the first day. An image of her brown
eyes boring into mine like she wants to skin me alive has singed itself into
my brain.  She’s a stunning  woman even when  mad with  flared  nostrils,
flushed cheeks, and waving hands.
    I  need to  come up with  a plan  for  the Bandini  gala. It  was never my
intention to get off on the wrong foot with Santiago already, or his sister for
that matter. Looking like a dick  before the season begins doesn’t make me
happy. Santiago and I will spend countless hours together doing press tours
and going to sponsor meetings, which means his sister will be around just
as much.
    I  snapped when he blamed me for something that wasn’t my  fault. Let
this be a lesson for  him to  not open his mouth  without  thinking, a  prime
example of  what  can go  wrong  in  the  public  eye,  shitty  consequences
included. But it’s not right how I took my anger out on his sister.
    During  our earlier walk-through of the course, I apologized to him again
because I was ashamed of what I’d said. I’m not above cornering people to
get what I want. He begrudgingly accepted my apology, his jaw tight as his
fist squeezed my extended hand.
    I  spend the rest of the day sitting  through more press sessions, the less
desirable side of F1.
    I  make it back to my hotel room with  enough time to get dressed for the
event. Santiago and  his  sister plan  on  attending the  gala, my  thoughts
confirmed when I  discreetly  asked around. No need to  draw attention  to
myself.
    The  poorly  lit  lobby  bar  welcomes me as I  order  a Scotch  from  the
bartender. Out of the corner of  my eye, I  see a woman sitting in  a booth,
twirling a straw in her drink. She looks vaguely like Santiago’s sister. I head
on over to her, confirming  she is, in  fact, the Alatorre  I  need to speak to.

38
Perfect timing.  Getting   an apology  out  now  sounds like   the  best idea
because I don’t dance around problems to avoid confrontation.
    Some people scurry  at trouble. Me  on the  other hand? I drive  my  car
straight  into    problems  at   two   hundred   miles   per   hour.   Fuck   the
consequences.
    “Do  you mind if  I sit here?”
    Her  body tenses at the sound of my voice. I’m not off to a great start by
the looks of  her grimace, rigid body  posture, and stilled hand holding her
straw. But  I  can work  with   it.  I  shoot her  a dazzling  smile  that makes
women drop to their knees. Tested and verified.
    I  remain motionless as her  almond eyes look up  at me. My  heart rate
speeds up as I gaze upon her, taking in  her smoky eyes that cloud at  my
perusal, lush lips that purse, and high cheekbones I want to run my knuckles
across. Her dark hair piles on top  of her head, begging to be let  down. A
few soft  curls  escape and trail down  her  thin neck.  Her dress dips  low,
accentuating tan skin and a fully displayed back. My  fingers itch to  stroke
her skin and test how soft it is.
    She pulls me out of my thoughts. “And if I  do mind?”
    Shit. Forgot  I  asked her a question. “I would  probably sit here anyway
then.” I give her a wide smile, enjoying her quick tongue.
    “Fine,  go ahead.” She lets out a soft  sigh and waves toward the empty
booth in front of her.
    Don’t  need to be told  twice. I  settle myself into  the seat, adjusting my
pants because my semi hard-on is pressing against the zipper. My   throat
welcomes the burn from a swig of  Scotch. A little  bit  of liquid  courage to
make it through this conversation without flirting with her.
    “I  wanted to apologize about earlier because I shouldn’t have insinuated
something like that. I’m not proud of myself for what I said.”
    Brown  eyes linger on my face as she gauges my sincerity. I take another
look at her because shock still courses through me at how she disarms me.
Her bone structure adds to her allure, along with full red-painted lips, long
lashes, and straight, white teeth. She has a strikingly exotic look—a Spanish
heritage evident by her dark hair, tan skin, and hint of an accent.
    My  head takes off.  I imagine  her red lips wrapped around my  cock as
she sucks me off, her lipstick marking me while  my hands tug on her hair.
Can’t help  my  sexual appetite when I  fuck  like  I  race—wild,  risky,  and
often. Blame the adrenaline rush or feeling like a god behind the wheel.

39
    “It’s    fine.”  Her   flat  voice  tells   me  differently.  Fine   is  a  woman’s
equivalent to a  land mine  because you have absolutely no  idea when or
where that shit will explode.
    “It  isn’t,  and I don’t want to annoy you anymore. Honestly. I want to put
it behind us and say I’m sorry for insinuating you slept with your brother.” I
withhold the urge to cringe at my own stupidity.
    “Consider it  dealt with. Apology accepted.” She fiddles with the straw of
her drink.
    “What   are you  doing here  with  your  brother?” I  take  another sip  of
Scotch, the cold liquid sliding against my tongue.
    “I’m   actually following  him  around this whole year.” She tilts  her head
at me.
    Great. She’ll be spending ten months with us, and I already fucked up.
    “You’ll   be attending a lot of races then. Are you a fan?”
    A   small smile  tugs  at her  lips.  “My   weekends growing  up included
following  my  brother everywhere. Kart  races, real races, all the Formula
phases. He has the talent.” She looks down at her hands. “Of  course, I’m
excited to join  him because I’m  proud of how  far he has come. New  car,
team, and everything.”  She glances at me, her eyes gleaming in  the  low
light of the bar while her lips fight a smile.
    I   smirk   at  her. “He’ll    be  in   good  hands with   the  equipment  and
engineers. Bandini cars  are the  best. There’s a  reason they’re  the most
sought-after team, so it’ll  give  him an  advantage. But he still  has to deal
with me.”
    The sound of her soft laugh stirs something up inside of me.
    “How  do you keep your ego in check?”
    “I  don’t.”  My grin  expands.
    She rolls her eyes, and fuck if it doesn’t turn me on. Her delicate features
entice me, tempting me to scoot in closer to check her out and catch a peek
at her chest. But I stop myself because I have a cap of one sleazy move per
day. I can’t believe I  insinuated she slept with  her brother. I’m  losing  my
touch.
    “You  need someone to rein you in.”  Her  cheeks turn a pretty shade of
pink before she shakes her head. “I mean, not me, but it’s always good to be
grounded.” She puts a stray curl behind her ear.
    “Being  grounded is dull. I don’t  drive cars at two hundred miles an hour
to stay boring.”

40
    Her  lips  purse  and her  brows pinch  together. “Being   grounded isn’t
boring. It’s realizing that, when all of this—”  she waves her arms around us
—“is over, you still  have people there for you in the end. Good people who
are humble because no one wants to hang around an asshole.”
    I’m   going  to  guess I’m  the  asshole here.  I  sit  with   her words  and
consider my situation. But  I  know good people—who  is she to judge  me
when she’s young and naïve?
    Her phone rings. “I better get going. My ride is here.”
    “I’ll   walk you out.”
    Her   face flashes  with   surprise before  she  recovers. Mine   probably
matches hers because I can’t remember the last time I walked a girl out of
anywhere except a club.
    I   get  up  from  the  booth  and  offer  my   hand, acting  the  part  of  a
gentleman. She looks at it for a moment before placing  her palm in mine.
My skin  buzzes at the physical contact. She shivers when my thumb runs
across her palm, her soft skin smooth under my calloused digit.
    Hmm. Her body reacts to mine in the same way.
    I  remove my hand from hers and place it on her exposed back as I lead
us toward the entrance of the hotel. Our physical connection is an exciting
development, one worth exploring further  at another time. She sucks in  a
breath when I stroke my hand down the ridges of her spine. I  tend to be a
cheeky bastard. Her skin feels warm and soft beneath my palm, her shallow
breaths matching the rhythm of our feet.
    Maybe  I’ll  enjoy having Santiago around after all because it seems like
her hanging with us will   stimulate me. I want to  see what other responses
she has to me. Or under me. Or on top of me.
    I  need to get myself under control.
    We exit  the hotel to find her brother leaning against a town car near the
entrance.
    “Maya,  let’s go! The driver’s  been waiting.” Santiago’s voice booms off
the walls.
    Maya. I  like the name.
    She jumps a foot away from me, breaking our contact. Her eyes glare at
me before she says a rushed goodbye and walks away. I  shake my head,
trying to rid  my naughty thoughts, a gesture worth chuckling at. Her perky
ass stands out, the tight  black material  of  her dress hugging  her curves.
Damn. I definitely will like seeing her around.

41
    Her  brother helps her into the car before he turns back toward me. His
stare speaks a silent warning I choose to ignore, instead deciding to shoot
him a cocky grin and a chin tip. He disregards me and enters the car.

42
5

43
                                                    Maya






The air in the car is thick with  tension, and not the good kind. Bright lights
reflect off  the car’s window  as we pass through the city. Santiago hired a
driver to  take us to the gala, reminding  me how  I’m  in  over my  head. A
poser surrounded by the rich and famous.
    “Why  were you walking out of the hotel with him?” Santi seethes.
    “He  actually came to apologize for  what he said at the press event. We
chatted and  then I   came outside.  It’s   not  a big   deal, no  need  to  get
annoyed.”
    Placating Santi has been my job  for years. He tends to be a situational
hothead, much like other F1 racers. High-stress situations usually call for it.
    “You  should stay away from  him. Hell,  stay away from most of  the F1
drivers. They’re not here for happily-ever-afters, white picket fences, a dog,
and two kids. They fuck around. A lot.” His hands clench in front of him.
    “You  are aware I lost my virginity  like four years ago, right? No need to
protect me anymore when my virtue is no longer intact.”
    If  looks could  kill,  Santi would have murdered me twice already in this
car alone. Wrong joke at the wrong time. Message received.
    “I  don’t  want to be aware. No. Keep that shit to yourself. These guys are
different from  boys you  dated in  college. They’re  the ultimate  fuckboys.
Liquor,  ladies, maybe even  drugs. Who  the hell  knows.  I  haven’t  hung
around them much since I kept to myself with Kulikov.”
    “I’ll    be careful.  But  Noah is  part of  your  team now.  We’re all  stuck
around one another and I don’t want things to be awkward with us. At least
not more than they have to be.”
    No  use denying my physical attraction  toward Noah, but I  can sure do
my best for Santi. I owe him that much.
    I  give him  a sweet smile while I  pat his hand, hoping to calm him.  His
lips tip down.  He must be concerned because none of my usual tactics are
working on him.
    “You’re  my little  sister so it’s my job to  protect you. Be careful, okay? I
can’t keep an eye on you all the time. Especially with  someone like Noah.
His bedroom has a revolving door and a waiting list.”

44
    My   body   tenses. Thanks for   the  reminder.  Nothing   like   a  classic
manwhore, one so stuck in his ways he can’t see straight. Good thing those
types of relationships aren’t on my radar.
    “You  don’t need to worry about me. I’m  up to only good, remember?” I
shoot him a goofy smile.
    He  grins at my cute stupidity and tugs me in for  a hug, constricting my
air supply.
    “I  love you. You know that, right?” His chest vibrates while he speaks.
    I  return his hug with a squeeze. “Of course. I love you too. Now let’s go
party!”





The swanky event, in fact, surpasses my original idea of a sponsor party. I
picture old men rubbing elbows and chatting about their stocks. But it’s all
so much more. We walk into a ballroom decorated to the nines with crystals
and flowers hanging from  the ceiling,  waiters walking  around with  food,
and dripping champagne towers on several tables. I grab a couple of fancy-
looking appetizers while I walk around the room.
    Lots  of  bigwigs  visit  to shake hands with  the elite  of  racing. But  the
scene includes unlimited alcohol,  a decent DJ, and silk  dancers spiraling
from the ceiling. It  resembles more of an overdone wedding than a gala for
race car drivers. F1 is pretty hip, not going to lie.
    Santiago reluctantly leaves me to my own devices after being called over
by his agent. He gives me a warning look before walking away, but I brush
off his worries with a flick  of my hand. I follow his rule of  not talking to the
other drivers. But he can’t fault me when others talk to  me because I can’t
control everyone else. Loopholes make life interesting.
    I  occupy a seat at the bar when He Who  Is Definitely  Up  to No  Good
shows up and sits next  to me. His  intoxicating  cologne short-circuits  my
brain cells. Somehow his hair already looks like a disheveled mess and his
bow tie lays crooked against his pressed shirt. His unruliness brings a smile
to my face. Sturdy hands that caressed my spine an hour ago hold another
glass of Scotch. I regret looking Noah straight in the eye, caught off guard
by a penetrating gaze, his deep blue eyes framed by thick, long lashes.

45
    A  simple smile  he sends my way tugs at my lower half.  I can’t  control
my body’s response to him, especially when he looks at me like he wants to
kiss me.
    “What’s   a pretty  girl  like  you  doing all  alone at  an event  like  this?”
Noah’s voice has a rough sound to it  like  he spent the night partying and
drinking—sensual and gravelly all at once.
    “Aw,  you  think I’m  pretty. How  charming. Santi left  me alone because
he’s busy kissing ass.” I point a pink-nailed finger  toward my brother who
is chatting with a group of sponsors.
    “More  than that.”  Noah’s megawatt smile makes my heart clench. Well,
don’t you have a way with  words. “Ah,  a day  in the life  of  a celebrity. A
tough cross to bear.”
    I  chuckle. “I  doubt I’ll   ever get used to hearing that. Can’t imagine my
brother as a celebrity. So weird.”
    “It  takes time. Wait until  he’s followed around by paparazzi to the point
where he can’t even eat or shit in peace. This place corrupts the best of us,
surrounded by endless money, booze, women—you name it. A playground
for the privileged.”
    I  turn toward  him and glance down at his outfit.  He pulls  off a tuxedo,
looking roguishly handsome with smooth material clinging to his body. My
fingers twitch at the temptation to run through his tousled hair that hints at
his rowdiness.
    But  I don’t because it’ll ruin my efforts to be good.
    “Did   this place change you?” I try to keep my voice  neutral, not giving
away any  feelings.  He’s the  last  person Santi  would  want  me to  hang
around with.
    His  eyes harden. “I was born into it. Son of a legend and all.” He flashes
me an eye roll. “So technically, no, since it’s all  I’ve ever known. Can’t  be
corrupted by something that made you.”
    I  scrunch my nose. “We aren’t like that. We were raised in a small home
by modest parents. Santi didn’t even go to college, so he could race to make
money. Gave  up  a  lot  to  pursue  a  dream. He   paid  my  parents back
everything they’ve ever invested in him because it means the world to him
to provide for them.”
    “Humble  beginnings make the best success stories. Your brother signed
a twenty-million-dollar  contract though, and that’s a lot of money, so with it
comes responsibility.” His eyes stare intensely into mine.

46
    I  sigh,  aware of  Santi’s most  recent financial  gain. He  may surround
himself with  pompous people, but he isn’t  like  most of  these greedy and
egotistical guys.
    Noah takes a big sip of  his drink. I  copy him, chugging my  champagne
—a dose of liquid confidence to dull my nerves.
    “What   was it  like  being a kid  around  here?” I  look  across the room,
imagining a young Noah hanging out with these people.
    “While   growing up,  I thought it  was the coolest thing  ever. And I  still
do. But my  dad isn’t  exactly father  of the year. Nannies took  care of me
while my mom was off  yachting the world. But  woe is me, the hard life of
someone who has it all.”   The sadness in his voice  betrays his attempted
nonchalance.
    “Do  your parents come to see your races?”
    “Every  now  and then. Dad’s coming to  the Barcelona one. My  mom’s
another story, occasionally popping in  when it’s  most  convenient for  her
and her friends.” He tips his glass and clinks it against mine before we both
drink to that notion.
    I  sense parent issues with this one.
    He  looks at me with bright  eyes. “What about you? What brings you to
the crazy life of F1 racing?”
    “Do  I need a reason besides my brother competing?” I smile at him.
    “Well,  I assumed you were here for me, but now that you mention it, that
sounds plausible." He hits  me with   a playful  grin  that sparks something
inside of me.
    I  shake my  head at him. “I   just graduated, and I  wanted to travel  the
world.”  I  hold  back on  mentioning my  vlog  because I don’t  want  to be
judged by someone like him—a man who thrives and succeeds.
    “Well  you  picked the right  year to join. You  get to see exotic locations
with  a bonus of  me  kicking  your  brother’s ass. You  can’t Pinterest that
shit.”
    I  throw my head back and laugh. His cockiness has no bounds, but I like
the way he teases, uncaring with a glint of mischief in his eye.
    “How  do you  fit your  head in your helmet? I’m worried  it must expand
the more people stroke your ego,” I say with fake concern.
    “I  have one custom made to avoid that issue.”
    We  continue   our  banter  until   someone calls  him   away.  He  looks
unenthusiastic at the interruption, his feet remaining planted to the ground.

47
    “Duty  calls.”  I tilt my empty glass to him.
    He sends me a smirk and mock salute as a goodbye.





I explore Melbourne on Friday since Santi has a busy day with practice and
press events. As interesting as his plan sounds, I decline his  invitation  to
join him.
    I  spend the day taking photos and discovering the city. A local street-art
tour gains my interest, and I enjoy  the ability  to fade into the group while
surrounding myself with  fellow  tourists.  When I  hang with Santi,  it  feels
like I’m  on display. The attention he receives stifles me. People always take
pictures, ask questions, or request autographs. And I hate feeling watched.
He tells me everyone eventually gets used to it and I won’t notice them after
a while.
    That type of complacency scares me.
    The rest of  the day goes by quickly. Newfound privacy  comforts me so
much that I eat lunch alone, at a table for two  no less. My solo day seems
short-lived when an old man sits in the chair across from me. He eventually
gains the courage to strike up a conversation after fifteen minutes. I politely
engage in the discussion of his arthritis, nodding along like I understand the
struggles of chronic pain. He even shows me about one hundred photos of
his grandkids.
    What  can I  say? I’m a  sucker for never saying no,  because how can I
look that poor older man in  the face and decline seeing photos of his little
tater tot?  His  words, not  mine.  I  can’t.  So  I  end up  spending an  hour
entertaining a  man  named Steve,  even offering   him  a  signed  Bandini
baseball cap as a parting gift along with a promise to text him  a picture of
the Prix track  on race day. I  don’t know  the risk  of giving  a grandpa my
cellphone number. But he seems sweet, so I give in.
    My  mom calls me while I’m walking  down a side street.
    “Cómo  estás?” My mom follows my vlog religiously, commenting on all
my posts with encouraging messages and quotes. She’s cute like that. I even
get texts with gifs as a way for her to express her feelings.
    “I’ve   been having fun so far. Santi’s pretty busy with the business side of
things. I don’t know how he finds the energy.”

48
    We stayed out late and he got up at the crack of dawn to go drive on the
track. Meanwhile, I  hit the snooze button about five  times before I finally
got up.
    “He  lives for the sport, so he puts up with the social side of things. Keep
an eye on him because he works too hard.” There goes my mom, always the
worrier.
    “I’ll    try  my  best. I  can’t  do what  he does, schmoozing and boozing.
People here are snooty and full of themselves.”
    “I’ve   been reading gossip about those different drivers. Men like  Liam
Zander and Noah  Slade pop  up all   the time,  and you  should  see what
women say about them. Don’t get me started on Jax, that man has trouble
following  him like a bad smell.”  Her voice fails to hide her disdain. I don’t
ask for more information because gross details don’t interest me.
    “Be  careful  what you read. They can start spinning  stories about Santi
one day.  Reporters are aggressive. And   they  love  an interesting  story,
whether it’s true or not.”
    “Have  you  met his  teammate?” She can’t conceal her  curiosity  about
Noah, and I can’t blame her.
    “Yeah,  he’s not  as terrible as stories claim.  But  he’s still  the ass who
thought I was Santi’s girlfriend.”
    “Que  bruto. Someone should’ve raised him better, given him extra love
and attention. That must’ve been embarrassing for him.”
    “I   think   that’s his  problem.  It   must be  such  a lonely   life  for   him,
screwing around with whomever and having no one to celebrate wins with.
His own family  barely comes to the races. Like his dad visits a few times a
year, his mom even less. Makes me wonder if there is more to this show he
puts on. I doubt he even realizes it though, especially when people like him
always think they’re happy until  they aren’t anymore. But who knows, I’m
speculating, and it’s  not fair  to  judge.” Unfiltered   words rush out  of  my
mouth.
    “Cuídate.   Behind   the  glitz   and   glam,  people  live   with    lies  and
unhappiness.”
    I  change the  topic, not  wanting  to talk  about Noah  anymore. It  feels
wrong to  expose the small  truth  he shared with  me last  night  about his
parents. My mom and I  catch up on  plans for the weekend, and not soon
after, I hang up the phone and go back to the hotel.

49
6

50
                                                    Noah






Qualifying   on  Saturday  is  the   second-best part  of   racing  because a
successful Saturday is  essential to  winning   on  Sunday. A  position  for
Sunday’s race depends on the qualifier. Getting a sucky start on Saturday
means you’re fucked on Sunday, unless you put in extra work to get on top.
    Pole  positions are my and everyone else’s favorite. I  can bounce back
from a second-or third-place starting point though, not needing to pressure
myself to  over-perform. Back of  the grid  tends to be the worst.  I haven’t
placed there since the start of my career, always preferring spots between
P1 and P3.
    Squeals of the  tires hitting  the road bounce off  the pit walls  as I  walk
toward Bandini’s  area. Each team  has their  own garage on  the pit   lane
where the team  preps before the  race, including  small rooms  above the
workstation where Santi and I get ready. I gear up in my  suite for my  two
practice sessions.
    I  complete two  successful practice rounds like  I  wanted. My  qualifier
went even better, landing  me the  pole position  for  the Australian  Grand
Prix. Best spot on the grid. Santiago isn’t far behind, qualifying third,  right
behind Liam Zander. Not bad for the new guy.
    For  the sake of the team I want him  to succeed, since we also compete
together during individual races. I’m not totally selfish. He needs to do well
for us to win a separate Championship, the Constructors’, which happens at
the same time as the World Championship. A total of twenty-one races and
two coinciding Championships.
    Santi can settle for winning  the Constructors with me because I want to
be the  World   Champion  this  year.  My  teammate  can keep  his  shiny
consolation prize.
    Santiago, Liam, and I  attend a press conference meant for the top three
qualifiers. I sit between the two of them as reporters hit us with questions.
    “Liam,  can you tell us about your strategy with McCoy this year?”
    “Besides  fucking   through the  McCoy   family?”  I   whisper  under my
breath, the microphone attached to my cheek not picking up on my voice.

51
    Liam  chuckles and shakes his head. We fuck around with one another,
keeping the conferences interesting while breaking up our routine.
    “Team  strategies are  the  best kept  secret.  Can’t  have Bandini   here
catching onto all  of my  tricks,  particularly the  hothead over there.” Liam
points to  Santiago  over  my  shoulder. “But   we  have big   plans for   the
upcoming races, including new specs on our cars. Going to give Bandini a
run for their money.”
    “What  he means to say is the view sure looks nice behind P1.” My gruff
voice makes reporters laugh.
    “P2  allows me to screw Noah’s car from behind, hitting him at the right
angle. Oh, wait. That’s Santiago’s job, my bad.”
    I  smack Liam’s backward ballcap off his head.
    Thankfully,   Santiago  refrains  from   any  stupid  comments  this  time
around. He  looks  at Liam   and me  oddly.  I  let  Liam’s  comments  slide
because he’s actually one of my good friends and greatest opponent, at least
before Santiago came around. Our verbal  sparring makes it  on  YouTube
every time.
    Liam’s   a  German guy   who  drives  with   McCoy,  another top   team.
Blonde-haired, blue-eyed man with a god complex. I like him a lot since we
became friends  during  our  young  karting  days.  Raced together  in  the
Formula phases and we even competed on the same team when he started,
both rising up together.
    He  acts like a total douche to women, and that says a lot  coming from
someone like me. I may be an ass, but Liam can be worse. His preppy looks
deceive the best of  them. A  fuck-ton  of  pressure rests on him  this  year
because his contract with McCoy will  expire, and he slept around with the
owner’s niece.
    Unlike  my  preference for one-and-done situations, Liam actually keeps
girls  around for   longer than  one  time.  I  can’t  fault  him  when  women
willingly  agree. But his F1 seasons include one or two girls on rotation who
eventually get their hearts broken, spilling their story to  the gossip rags. A
yearly cycle. But now  he needs to keep himself locked up like a good boy
after pissing off Peter McCoy.
    I   occasionally  watch  the  trashy  gossip  videos  of   us on   YouTube,
shameful to admit  they entertain me.  McCoy  can’t be  happy with  Liam.
Recent videos have focused on Liam’s lack of foresight, calling him out for

52
fucking around during  an important year. Sleeping with  your boss’s niece
tends to stir up lots of emotions.
    Maya  hangs out in the corner of the press room, trying to blend into the
wall. Fat chance that’s possible. She looks beautiful in ripped jeans and a T-
shirt that clings  to her chest. Her  wavy hair  is up in  a ponytail  that bobs
while she leisurely scrolls through her phone.
    It  annoys me how she only tunes in to Santi’s answers, staring up from
her phone every now and then to watch him. It’s like Liam and I don’t exist.
If she doesn’t care then she shouldn’t come, plenty of reporters would kill
for a spot in here. Why does she find her brother fascinating? It blows  my
mind how  she looks at him  like  he hangs the moon for  her, her  eyes all
proud and shit when he talks.
    Is this usual sibling stuff? I  glance over at Santi while he speaks, curious
to see what gains her interest.
    “Santiago,  how do  you feel about  your new contract  with your  rival’s
team? Any stress that comes with driving against one of the greats?”
    I  school my features like a well-trained  PR puppet. Inside my irritation
grows, an eye roll   barely contained. When will   these guys let  go of  the
contract deal? They  lack  original   questions, the  same type  asked each
conference, forgoing the hype of the first race of the season.
    “Uh,  it’s  not about contracts, but rather how well we drive. I don’t think
about dollar signs or Noah when I’m  out there. I think  about the next turn
and the finish line, with a possible podium ending.”
    Okay, not bad. The team publicist must be helping him after yesterday’s
disaster.
    “Noah,  who do you consider to be your biggest threat this season?”
    A  cocky smile breaks out across my face. Show time.
    “I   like  to consider  myself as my  biggest threat. When  I  race, it’s  me
versus my instincts. Everything around me disappears. I test myself, seeing
how long I  can wait before pressing the brake, or how to overtake another
person. I don’t think  about the other drivers out there more than I have to.
That’s where others screw up.”
    Camera bulbs flash in front of me and capture my confident smile. Maya
shakes her head, apparently not a fan of my response. The idea displeases
me. My  eyebrows pinch  together, and my  lips  turn  down  into  a frown.
Appearances represent everything in this line of work because fans buy into
this  shit  and love  it.   They  even make  videos  about  our  bizarre press

53
conferences every race like bromance videos and rival  compilations. You
name it, there’s a video on it.
    A  reporter moves on to  Liam, asking another pointed question. “Liam,
what game plan do you have to clear your name in the media?”
    “Why   don’t  you ask me in  a few  months? I want  to keep my  plan to
myself, in case it goes wrong.” Liam shrugs.
    I  nudge him with an elbow. “That tends to happen with him.”
    Liam  turns toward me and brushes his eyebrow with his  middle finger.
My  head drops back and I laugh.  I lift   my head, catching Liam  shooting
Maya a grin that  she returns, no longer inattentive. My  fists tighten under
the table as I stare straight ahead.
    Liam  can be considered a good-looking guy. A six-foot tall German jock
who needs a short beard to hide his baby face. Basically, a  glorified  tool.
Women  dig  his   positive  vibes  and   carefree attitude,   along  with   his
preference for multiple repeats. Everything about him screams good parents
who gave him sugar, spice, and everything nice. Unlike  me who  reeks of
broodiness and bad memories, driving away from  my  demons week after
week.
    We finish  up answering questions and I leave the stage. I don’t want to
be there for another minute more. I’m mentally done with today.





Nothing tops  the buzz of  a race day.  Everyone deals with  their pressure
differently, tensions escalating as we approach Prix  time. Anticipation   of
events keeps everyone up and running. Sundays are my favorite day of the
week because who needs a church when I have a front-row seat to heaven.
    Every  racer does quick rounds to appease fans and sponsors, including
meet-and-greets, parades, and interviews—the usual crowd-pleasing  and
ass-kissing. Following that, I do my typical engine checks and attend a pre-
race stage event with an end goal of alone time in my Bandini suite.
    This  sport exhausts the best of us. I love it, but it  wears a person down
through the years.
    The  small  Bandini  suites can’t compare to  the  motorhomes the team
builds during the European leg of the tour. The plain room gets us by, with

54
enough essentials to appease the racers, including a couch and a mini fridge
stocked with waters.
    Music  is  my preferred method of  easing nerves before races. I have a
playlist and everything for each day of racing since I tend to be a creature of
habit who prefers solitude. Unlike other drivers, I  leave the celebrating for
after  a  race  when  I   actually  win.   No   one  likes  a  guy   who  parties
prematurely and doesn’t even end up on the podium. We leave that for the
sucky teams.
    Maya’s  laugh  seeps through the  thin  walls.  Santiago acts differently
from other Bandini guys, not minding Maya hanging around with him while
he preps for the race. Small quarters don’t allow for  much privacy  around
here. I try my best to not listen, but I  find the task difficult  with  our shared
wall, telling myself whatever I overhear isn’t my fault.
    Maya’s voice carries into my room. “Remember when you had your first
kart race? You almost threw up inside your  helmet, your nerves shot after
that kid nearly crashed into you.”
    I  like the sound of Maya’s soft laugh.
    “It  was intense. Never underestimate an adrenaline rush because they’re
no joke. I think it took  an hour for my heart to slow down and the nausea to
go away. How do you even remember that? You were like six at most.”
    “Mom   showed me a video of that race. They were reminiscing the day
you signed the Bandini  contract, including  showing me tons of  videos of
you  in   your  kart.   They’re   so  proud  of   you.”   Maya’s   voice  sounds
sentimental.
    My  parents never filmed my races, let alone watched them with a wave
of nostalgia.
    “You  know they’re  proud of you, too, right?  With starting up your  own
vlog and supporting me.”
    Maya  sighs. “Yeah,  but  you’re  the success story, and they  sacrificed
everything for you. The vlog  is starting out, and things like  that take time.
Let’s see what happens because I don’t want to disappoint myself or anyone
else. It’s hard to get a decent following.”
    “I’ll    share something you post to help you gain followers.  Plus, you’re
around a  bunch  of  famous  people—word will    get out  eventually.  Just
watch.”
    Curiosity  pushes me to see what she vlogs about. I  pick up  my phone
and google her,  quickly  finding   and bookmarking  her  channel for  later

55
when I have time to check it out.
    I  also go ahead and request to follow her on Instagram since she set her
account to private. Fuck it, why not. I’m curious, nothing more.
    Their  voices drop too low for me to catch the rest of their conversation. I
find it  difficult  to imagine a childhood like  Maya’s since I’m  an only child
with  no  competition  for   my  parents’  limited   attention.  Hit  the  parent
jackpot.  They  never  married,  avoiding  a  financial  train   wreck,  messy
divorce, and custody agreement neither of them wanted.
    I  put  my  headphones on and tune  out the  rest of  their  conversation.
Eavesdropping distracted me  enough, pulling   me away  from  my   usual
mental clearing before races.
    Not  soon  after, Santiago  and I  prepare for  our  cars. We  zip  up  our
matching race suits and grab our helmets. I touch the scarlet red paint, my
hand running across the signature glossy coat of  Bandini  cars, the warm
engine running beneath my  fingertips.  Ready to go.  Even after  all  these
years with the team, I still do this  same pre-race ritual. My favorite lullaby
is the rumbling sound of the car.
    I  lie  down in my  seat and strap myself into the cockpit, the clicking  of
the belt further  securing me.  One of  the techs hands me my  gloves and
steering wheel as I take a few deep breaths to ease my nerves.
    The crew  and I roll  up to the front  of the group, situating me in  the P1
spot while testing my radio connection. I grin to myself beneath my helmet.
Pole position will always be the most ideal spot in the whole Prix, and pride
fills me that I claimed it. Have to start the year with a boom.
    My  heart pounds in my  chest, the rhythm similar  to the shaking of  the
engine. The  team  slips  off  my   tire  warmers before  they  rush  off   the
pavement.
    One. Two. Three. Four. Five.
    Five  red lights shut off.  My  foot  pushes on the accelerator and my car
speeds down the runway, hitting a neck-breaking pace as tires rub against
the pavement. Commotion  buzzes through my  earpiece. Team members
speak to me, telling  me how  Liam  stays behind me, with  Jax overtaking
Santiago at the front.
    Fuck, I  love this feeling. Nerves fire  off in my  body as adrenaline seeps
into my blood, the sound of tires screeching across the pavement competing
with the whooshing in my ears. Bodily sensations breathe new life into me.
The engine hums as I push the car to its max capacity, testing the limits of

56
the new race car model. My lungs tighten in my chest as I approach the first
turn. I tap into my reflexes, becoming one with the car.
    The beautifully  executed turn happens in a blink. I tune out most of the
radio chatter that sounds off through my helmet, concentrating on breathing
in and out to relax my heart rate.
    I  continue to  hold down my  position as the race leader while  we twist
and turn down the track. If the team didn’t keep me updated, I’d lose count
of the laps. My car rips through the road like nothing. Liam tries to overtake
me at one of the turns but fails, his car falling back behind mine, sucking up
the dirty air. The team principal shares who else may threaten my lead.
    The  race is touch and go between Liam and me for  a while.  A  similar
season start—both  of   us   vying   for   the  top-place  spot.   We  have  a
competitive relationship on the track, knowing each other’s moves since we
were kids in  karts. Both of  our  teams strategize with us for  ways to beat
each other.
    Santiago isn’t even a blip on my radar, seeing as the team hasn’t spoken
a single word about him.
    I  take a quick pit stop halfway through the race to get new tires. My car
stops in the pit  lane, allowing the mechanics to take over with  their  drills
and machines. Process takes one point eight seconds. I thank the team via
radio for their quick turnover time. A speedy pit crew are the unsung heroes
of F1, the ones who make the magic happen once I box in the garage area.
    I    talk   back   and  forth    with   a   race  engineer  during   my    drive,
communicating competitors’ positions and specs. He wants to check in on
how the car feels for the first  race. The team shares strategies and I follow
along for  the most part, but  some calls I  make on my  own  because they
don’t pay me millions  to follow  every command. They trust me behind the
wheel.
    I  continue to  hold the front-runner  position for  most of  the fifty-seven
laps. Liam overtakes me a couple times,  but I  beat him back into  second
place with ballsy turns. He flips me off after I threaten to hit him during one
curve. With one lap left, Liam  will  come out in second place, and Santiago
will end up in fourth.
    The  sweet sound of  engines roaring fills  my  ears. My  hands grip  the
steering wheel tightly as I make the last turn toward  the finish line.  I push
down on  the peddle a  few seconds early, allowing  me  to surge past the

57
waving checkered flag before Liam.  Fans scream as they announce I won
the Prix.
    “Fuck  yes, guys, what  a big win!  Thank  you, everyone. Amazing first
race. Let’s fucking go!” My foot  lifts off  the throttle.
    The radio buzzes with cheers.
    I  throw my fist in the air, proud of a race well done. Suck it, Santiago.

58
7

59
                                                    Maya






My heart speeds up as Noah passes the finish line. Santi follows soon after,
his car a red blur as he completes a cool-down lap. His performance on the
track will   frustrate him  despite driving  well.  He  still  gets points  for  the
Constructors’ Championship, but in  the end, against these other guys, it’s
not good enough. That’s the life of high stakes and large salaries. Plus, the
pressure of a big  racing team  and a pricey  contract are on  my brother’s
mind.
    I  meet Santi near the pit area. He smiles at the team when he gets out of
the car,  shaking  hands and  thanking  the  pit  crew—an  image  of  good
sportsmanship. His jaw   twitches  while  he  signs fans’  gear  at a  crowd
barrier. Not wanting  to  get in  the way, I  decide to  meet him in  his  suite
instead of waiting outside. Better for him to relax first.
    By  the time he makes his way back to his room, he looks calm. I get up
from the small couch and give him a hug. His sweaty body plasters to mine
as my lungs get a  deep inhale of oil,  sweat, and rubber. Kind  of  gross. I
pretend to gag as I wrap my arms around him, my head barely reaching his
shoulders.
    “You  tried hard. Fourth place is good, and you’ll be on the podium next
time.”
    He  returns my hug. “I’m  disappointed I didn’t  try to cut  around more. I
played it too safe because I was scared of messing up the car.”
    “You  can’t race with  a fearful mindset. You never have before, and you
shouldn’t start now, not when you’re racing against the best. Think of it  as
another car with plenty of parts to fix anything.”
    Despite today’s cautious performance, Santi has a rep of being ruthless
on the track.
    “You’re   right,  I’ll  bring  my  best next time.  Screw it.”   He pulls  away
from me.
    Santi  beats himself  up  whenever he  doesn’t place  on the  podium.  I
believe he can succeed next time out on the course, especially with plenty
of races for him to improve his standing for the World Championship.

60
    “I’m   going to  have to show up at the  after-party to congratulate Noah.
It’s what sponsors would want, and I don’t  want to look  like a sore loser.”
He sticks his tongue out at me. “Top five isn’t that bad for the first one. I’ll
bounce back.” A telling smile crosses his face. Santi cares about losing, but
he won’t let it get in the way of his professionalism. What an adult.
    Yay for team spirit.
    “Then  we better get going. Let’s go wish Noah a job  well done.” I  give
him a mischievous grin.
    Noah  may put  on a whole  arrogant show, but he backs it  up with  his
racing. His performance makes it obvious why fans love him.
    I  sense the excitement from the rowdy crowd once Santi and I walk  up
to the podium event. Groups of them gather around, bouncing along to the
music streaming from the speakers on the stage, waving around face poster
cutouts of Liam  and  Noah. I  can’t  imagine being so  famous that people
actually pay for big blown-up pictures of your face. Watching my own face
staring back at me would make me die of embarrassment, right there on the
stage floor.
    Santi  and I  hang out in  a VIP  area off to  the side, enjoying  the show
from a less sweaty and chaotic distance. My preferable choice. We have a
full  visual  of  the winners’   podium, including  the  perfect view   of  Noah
spraying his champagne on Liam. I sigh at the display. Santi looks over at
me and raises his brow. I cover up my laugh with a cough, embarrassment
tinging my cheeks.
    In  F1, champagne is the messier equivalent of confetti launchers at other
sporting events. Drivers shake bottles and splatter the contents everywhere.
The crowd roars as champagne splashes on them, opening their mouths to
capture droplets. Who needs Girls Gone Wild when you have F1 podiums?
    Santi drops his disappointed mood, replacing his frown  with  a smile as
all of  them celebrate on stage. He even cheers when they announce all of
the winners.
    We find  Noah, Liam, and the other winner outside of the press building
after a post-race conference to say congratulations to them. I choose to give
a thumbs up while saying hi, barely suppressing a groan at how awkward I
look. Smooth, Maya. Killing it.
    Noah lets out a gruff snicker at my attempt, along with Liam barking out
a laugh, adding to my  embarrassment. Can’t fault myself when I  have no
idea how to greet them.

61
    I  stand around awkwardly.  Santi offers  Noah and  Liam  a typical  guy
handshake and slap on the back move. Noah’s eyes heat up at the sight of
me, swirling  with deeper shades of blue than usual as they trail down  my
body. He flatters  me. Either  he sucks at subtlety,  or he doesn’t  care if  I
notice.
    My   breath hitches when  I  check  him  out in  his  red  race suit.  Tight
material presses up  against firm   muscles, highlighting  a  strict  workout
schedule. His hair looks sweaty and unruly, with a few pieces sticking up in
different directions, and his wicked smile shines. He makes wild look sexy.
I glance away before he catches me staring at him like a weirdo.
    Being  around all  these hot guys throws me  off.  I need to  stop having
these intrusive thoughts  about Noah,  especially since  he’s my  brother’s
teammate. How  do  other  women  keep up  with   these men?  My  brain
bombards itself with  images of  puppies and grandmas to avoid  checking
him out again.
    Liam’s  eyes gaze up  and down  my body.  These guys boost my  self-
esteem by the second because they don’t give a damn  about hiding their
attraction. He gives  me a lazy  grin  when he notices  my lifted  brow  and
crossed arms. But I feel disappointed when my body doesn’t have the same
reaction to Liam that it  does with Noah, my  insides not heating up from a
glance. Not  even  a flare   of  attraction.  No  racing  heartbeat or  warmth
pooling inside  of me  at his  perusal, only a  basic acknowledgment of his
good looks.
    “I’m   Liam.  We haven’t had a chance to meet yet, but I saw you  in the
press conference and had no clue you’re Santi’s sister. You were a sight for
sore eyes in a sea of old male reporters.” He takes my hand and gives it a
kiss like a prince from  the olden days. Oh, this one is full of pick-up  lines.
Hanging around him will be a good time.
    I   chuckle, snapping  back into   the conversation.  “I’m   making  it  my
mission to attend as few of those events as I can. It’s surprising how they let
you get away with taking shots at one another, and at the reporters too.”
    Nothing  short of a comedy roast each week with Liam and Noah teasing
each other, their candidness pleasing reporters and fans.
    Liam  beams at me. “You  haven’t seen anything yet. Wait  for the dirty
race moves, crashes, and losing streaks. That’s when it all gets exciting.”
Liam cups a hand to his face, like he shares a secret, except his voice keeps
the same volume level. “Noah here is a sassy one when he gets mad.”

62
    Noah looks  at Liam with  a glare that gives me chills,  a feeling running
from the base of my neck to the bottom of my spine. His narrowed eyes are
ones I’d  hate to  be  on the  receiving  end of.  No  thank you.  He  can be
intimidating  as hell,  but Liam  seems unphased as he laughs and nudges
Noah in the arm.
    “Told  you.” Liam  winks at me. His blue eyes twinkle as he beams at me.
He has this  lightness about him  that automatically  brings a  smile to  my
face.
    Santi  shifts his weight  from foot  to foot.  A  signal that he wants to get
going, since we need to pack and get ready to travel to the next stop in the
Prix. Blame the busy schedule and long flights.
    “We’ll   see you in Bahrain. Maya and I  head out tomorrow morning  on
an  early  flight.   We  better  get   going  because we   need to   pack  and
everything.” Santi  runs a fidgety  hand through his hair. He  loves to pack
three days before his flight ever leaves, so it must eat him alive to have put
it off this long.
    “Man,  you’ll   have to come on my private jet  next time. Maybe we can
shift around a few flights  so you both can join.”  Liam’s eyes sparkle as he
pulls the slick move. He has this Devil Disguised as an Angel kind of look,
with  blonde  hair,  baby  blues,  and beaming  white  teeth.  Although   his
exterior screams innocent, his eyes say everything but.
    I  give him  a small smile in return, highly  doubting that his invitation  to
fly in  his jet has much to do with my brother. Probably has a lot more to do
with me.  Santi doesn’t notice Liam’s  flirting,   shocking since he bothered
me all weekend about how  these guys are after two things  only: trophies
and ladies. And preferably in that order.
    “That’ll   be cool. We’ll  definitely  take you up on  the offer,” my  brother
says.
    Noah gives Liam  a side glance and crosses his arms. Did he just roll his
eyes?
    I  don’t have a chance to analyze the situation further because Santi pulls
me away.

63
My vlog picks up more followers after Santi put it on blast for a week while
we  were in   Sakhir  for  the  Bahrain  Grand  Prix—growing  from   a  few
hundred followers to a solid thousand. The idea hits me of posting YouTube
videos of vlogs from  each stop on our list. Last week, I  filmed  during our
time in Bahrain, including a video from the practice sessions and interviews
with the fans around the racetrack.
    I  edit  and share a video  of  Santi placing  fourth  again in  the Bahrain
Grand Prix. Another loss for him, which  makes for an unhappy brother. He
says he’s worked out the kinks of his new car. We move along, ready to hit
the next race, time passing quickly with all the traveling from city to city.
    Followers  comment on how they love seeing behind-the-scenes footage
of F1  racing. Turns  out a  lot  of subscribers enjoy  that part  of  my vlog,
asking for  more webisodes. After  all  the positive  feedback, I  dedicate a
portion of videos to F1 racing and related activities. Not exactly my original
plan. But hey, give the fans what they want. The change helps my numbers
increase within a short amount of  time. Thousands tune in weekly for  the
new videos.
    New  follower requests flood my Instagram, including Noah, Liam, and a
few other racers. I accept them and decide to keep my profile private from
fans because I want to separate my vlog from my personal life.
    Liam  and Noah give my channel a shout-out on their own social-media
platforms when I tag them in racing clips. My  numbers skyrocket, blowing
my mind. Amazing what two  pretty boys can do. By the time we fly  to the
third race of  the season, I already have over  ten thousand followers.  Ten
points for Maya growing up! Look, Ma, I made it!
    We  land in Shanghai for  the Chinese Grand Prix. Santi  takes off soon
after we get set up in our hotel room since he scheduled tons of meetings. I
hang around the suite and relax after a long flight  because my body aches
from  sitting  upright  for  hours.  Another  race, another  basic hotel  suite.
White sheets and understated color palettes have become a staple of my life.
    I  eventually head over to the Bandini  motorhome, located right next to
the Shanghai racetrack. Easy access allows the crew to take breaks during
busy days. It runs like a mini headquarters, with suites for the racers to hang
around, along with meeting rooms for pre- and post-race consultations.
    While  grabbing a snack to eat, I run into someone. My eyes meet a pair
of green ones that belong  to a woman  about my  same height. She looks
about my age with her blonde hair wrapped up in a top knot, golden pieces

64
escaping the haphazard hairdo. Dressed casual, she rocks a white slogan T-
shirt, jeans with more holes than fabric, and white Adidas.  She gives off a
California beachy vibe from American television shows.
    “Oh,  sorry  about that. I’m  such a clumsy person.”  Her neck and chest
turn a shade of pink that contrasts against her tan skin.
    “It’s   no problem. I  run into  things all  the time too.  I haven’t  seen you
around here before.” That sounded weirder out loud.
    “I’m   Sophie. You probably haven’t because I just got here.” She offers
her hand and I take it.
    “Maya.  I haven’t seen anyone my age except my brother. Glad I ran into
you—literally.”
    She laughs. “It’s my  first time joining  the race. I wrapped up my classes
early for the year to spend time with my dad while he tours. Can’t say no to
a free vacation.”
    “I   graduated in  December!  And  who’s  your  dad? I  guess he’s  with
Bandini then?” I wave around the lobby of the motorhome that bustles with
activity.
    She fidgets with  her gold star necklace. “My  dad is the team principal.
He’s the one who runs the show around here.”
    “Oh,  wow. And you’re  going to be here for the rest of the season?” I try
not to sound too excited because I don’t want to scare her off yet. But  the
idea of a new friend sounds nice.
    “I’m   going  to  try  to convince  my dad  to let  me take  my fall   classes
online so I can stick around for  the whole Prix schedule. It’s my  first time
around since I was younger, so I have to take advantage.” Her smile makes
the dimples in her cheeks pop out.
    “Nice,  we can hang out since I’m going to be here for the whole season.
It’ll  be awesome to have someone my age keeping me young.” I  smile at
her.
    “What’s   the  deal with   everyone around  here? Spill  the  deets.”  She
abandons her previous nervousness. Does she get tense when people bring
up her dad and  his job?  He keeps Bandini up  and running because team
principals are bosses without owning the company.
    We both  pull out  a chair at one of  the nearby tables, ready to chat and
eat.
    “If  you’re  not yet aware, my brother is Santiago Alatorre.”

65
    Her  eyes bulge out of her  head. “No way. I  can totally  see it now that
you mention it  though. He’s got  that young Spanish hottie vibe  going for
him.”
    I  hold back a groan. Can’t say I think of my brother in that way, nor will
I ever.
    “Yeah, we both have the typical dark hair, brown eyes thing going for us,
even though I’m  the better-looking sibling.  But don’t  tell  him  that. These
racers and their egos, fragile little things.” I give her a cheeky grin.
    “He’s  the  new guy around here. Must  be a lot  of  pressure to keep up
with some of the best. How’s he getting along with Noah?”
    “Uh,  it’s been all right so far. They haven’t crashed in the past two races.
Go team.” I do a cheerleader arm pump.
    Sophie lets out a snort. “My dad was stressed to sign your brother on. He
worried about how  Noah would  take it  since he’s  been with Bandini  for
years. An original Bandini boy. The team doesn’t take on young drivers, it’s
like their standard, but your brother’s a World Champion now, which makes
him a hot commodity in this industry.” She lifts one brow on command.
    I  lift  a shoulder. “Yeah, he’s grateful to be a part of the best team. I still
think it’s crazy he’s one of the youngest members to ever join Bandini. But
Noah has handled the transition okay, seeing as he hasn’t chewed out my
brother yet. Well, besides after the first press conference.”
    She  waves her hand at  my  words. “Those  meetings are fifty   percent
serious and fifty percent drama. Fans love to watch, sitting on  the edge of
their couches—” she looks at me pointedly before continuing—“Be careful
with  Noah  though. I   hear all  kinds  of  stories  from  my  dad  and other
people.”
    “Like   what?” I  lean in, not  wanting to miss a word  of Sophie’s insider
info.
    “He’s  cocky, self-assured, and kind of a jerk. Plus, he sleeps with lots of
groupies. Yuck, yuck, and yuck. He’s the guy your dad threatens to bury in
a cement block. Well at least my dad would, said so himself before I joined
the  tour.”  Her   nose  scrunches. Seems like   her  dad  may  be  slightly
overprotective. “But  Noah has a right  to be confident,  being a three-time
World Championship winner and all  at such a young age. He can race for
years to come if he wants.”
    “Lovely.  Nothing  like a good playboy story to start the year off strong.”
Sarcasm weighs my words down.

66
    “My   dad has dealt with  one too many phone calls  from sponsors who
were concerned with his behavior. But what can my dad do? Noah remains
a professional out on  the track  and he has proven  to be  one of  the best
racers out there. He could just chill with the confidence sometimes.”
    “You  know, Sophie, I think you and I are going to get along fine.”
    She returns my  smile. We clink  our water  bottles together, cheering to
our new friendship.

67
8

68
                                                    Maya






Turns out Sophie and I  mesh well together. We both love  listening to  the
Jonas Brothers, eating  the same Ben  and Jerry’s  ice  cream flavor,  and
shopping at Zara instead of Fendi. Fundamental pillars of friendship.
    I  like having a new partner to attend sponsor events, press meetings, and
any other  snore-worthy activities.  Especially  one as  quick  and witty   as
Sophie. She comes off sassier than I’m used to, but I like how she doesn’t
take shit from anyone.
    I  tell  Santi that I’ll  meet him at the sponsored event since Sophie and I
will  take a car together. He fails to hide his curiosity when he asks to meet
the new  friend   I  made, claiming   he  wants to  make  sure I’m   not  out
corrupting a poor soul. His overprotection has hit new levels ever since we
joined the F1 tour.
    “Okay,  break down the guys for me. I haven’t been around these people
for like three years.” Sophie doesn’t miss a beat, wanting a rundown before
we’ve seen any of them inside the ballroom. Not that I  blame her. I wish I
had  been half   as  prepared  because these  men  ooze  confidence  and
sensuality.
    “You  know  my  brother and Noah, obviously.  I  met Liam  at the  other
Prix, and he’s a total  flirt.  No  promises that he may or  may not eye-fuck
you. Just a warning.”
    Sophie’s  eyes narrow. “I  haven’t  seen him since  before my  freshman
year of college. But I’ve read stories of him in the tabloids. Lately he’s been
popping up everywhere after he  slept with  his boss’s niece.” Her  lips  tip
down in a frown.
    I  cringe at the information about Liam  because what a low blow for his
standing with McCoy. Bad timing with his contract renewal.
    “Yeah,  I  don’t  know  how  wrong the  gossip columns  are about these
guys, so I barely pay attention to them. But that’s all  I can share because I
haven’t met any of the other racers yet.”
    “This  sponsor event is for the entire Prix so I’m  sure you’ll  see them in
all of  their hotness, at least from  far away. Sometimes I question if  it’s  a

69
requirement for F1 racers to be ridiculously attractive. Sex sure sells.” She
lifts one brow.
    I  shake my  head at her comment. Her  assumption can’t be far  off,  at
least from the press videos and interviews I’ve  seen on YouTube over the
years.
    We enter the  ballroom. There are ginormous chandeliers hanging from
the ceiling,  dimly  illuminating   the  room as classical  music fills   the air,
while  waiters offer  appetizers and small plates  of food.  I  love  attending
these events to see what party  planners come up with.  The  venue looks
beautiful and extravagant, bright lights glistening off my sequin dress.
    Sophie and I make our way toward the bar, linking  our arms together to
make it through the crowd, sliding past a series of suits. Alcohol is a must at
these types of  events. I  quickly  learned that  lesson after  one too  many
boring conversations about race cars and bank accounts.
    Sophie  pulls  us  into   an empty  spot  at  the  bar.  Liam  conveniently
occupies the area next to her, not holding back as his eyes roam over her.
    “Sophie,  I haven’t  seen you in years.” His baby blues smolder. I  try to
not feel offended that he shares an interest in her after flirting with me. But
I  guess I  should expect  it  since  all  these guys  have the  sex drives  of
teenagers.
    “Liam.”   She nods her head politely. Strange way to greet someone you
haven’t seen in a while.
    “What  can I get you two fine ladies?” He waggles his brows.
    “Isn’t  it  an open bar?” Sophie’s wit shines through and I love it. She may
become my favorite person during this whole Championship business.
    “Doesn’t  mean I  can’t  order it  for  you.  Make a man  feel useful.”  He
places a hand on his chest and pouts his lip.
    “Because you,  of  all  people, need your  ego stroked more than  usual.
Yeah right… But I’ll  take a Moscow Mule.” Sophie flashes a smirk, making
a dimple pop out.
    He grins at her before he looks at me expectantly.
    “I’ll   have the same.”
    Liam  politely  covers the  tip for  the bartender, making himself  needed
after all.
    “Why   do you two  want to  spend your night hanging with  stuffy  men?
They’re such a bore.” He clinks his beer bottle to our glasses, along with a

70
quick cheers before he takes a swig. Sophie’s eyes stay planted on Liam as
his lips tug on the bottle.
    “I’m    on the  hunt  for  my  future  husband. Was thinking   of  someone
between the ages of forty   and fifty.  Old  enough to  pay for  everything  I
want, young enough to not have a wrinkly dick.”
    I  choke on my  drink. Sophie shrugs at me while Liam’s  eyes linger on
her chest for a second too long.
    Pull  it together, man.
    “Sixty  and older means you’ll only have to rinse your mouth with bleach
for ten years instead of  twenty.” Liam  weighs the invisible  options  in his
hands, beer bottle bobbing along with him.
    “Unlike  Sophie who wants to become a mail-order bride, I came because
my brother drags me everywhere.”
    “How’s  your  brother transitioning with  our broody prince?”  Liam turns
toward me before his eyes drift back to his new interest. His eyes narrow at
her lips wrapping around a straw, eye-fucking her as she sucks on her drink.
    I  shoot him a look that tells him  he can’t bang my new friend because I
actually want her to join me at events. Hopefully, my eyes say, “hands off.”
Nights like these tend to be lonely and dull with Santi always being busy.
    He catches it and subtly nods with understanding. Good.
    “Sophie’s  dad handles them, giving them enough love  and attention to
not make them jealous.”
    “He’s  a hard chief, running his team in tip-top shape while expecting the
most from them. I  wonder what it’s  like  growing up  in his home. Care to
share?” Liam looks eagerly at Sophie while flashing her a bright smile.
    “Wouldn’t   you  like  to  know. Can’t  reveal our  secrets to the  enemy.”
Sophie pretends to seal her lips.
    “I  drive for  a different team. Not quite enemies, don’t be dramatic.”
    “Oh,  that’s rich coming from  you. Drama seems to follow you wherever
you go.” Sophie says the words with a smile on her face.
    Liam’s  smile becomes a full-blown grin. “Keeping tabs on me?”
    Sophie’s cheeks flush at Liam’s  raised brow before she takes a drawn-
out suck from her straw.
    I  break it up. “All right.  Oh look, it’s Noah.”
    I  grab onto  Noah’s arm and drag him  into the  conversation, no longer
wishing to be the third wheel.
    Noah looks down at my arm like it offends him. This is going swell.

71
    “Noah,  this is Sophie. Sophie, Noah.” I speak without thinking.
    “We  know  each other. I’ve been on her dad’s team for five  years.” He
gives me a puzzled look that is immediately replaced with one of hunger as
his eyes take me in, raking down my red dress. Thank you, Sophie, for the
outfit idea.
    My  stomach dips as I check out his tux, a new weakness of mine. Resist
the bow tie, Maya. This weekly  situation tortures me. What have I done to
deserve this type of punishment?
    No  matter how many times I tell my  brain Noah isn’t worth the trouble,
my body  won’t  agree. Out of  nowhere, his index finger  drags across my
knuckles, an electric  connection sparking at  his touch. My   drink  sloshes
when I pull my  hand away in a jerky motion. Cool liquid  trickles down my
skin.
    Noah’s  thumb  picks up  the  droplets before  he brings  the pad  to his
mouth, his eyes remaining on mine. Oh my God.
    I  inhale deeply, filling my lungs with air. He shoots me a telling wink.
    I  let out a breath of relief as Noah talks, placing his hand in his pocket.
    He  smiles at Sophie in a caring way. “Nice  to  see you though, Sophie.
Your dad sure sounds happy to have you visiting us. He talked all about it at
lunch the other  day, not shutting up  about you  finishing  up your  degree.
Says you should manage my funds.”
    Sophie gives a shake of her head. “And he told me lots about his dream
team and how smitten he is with all the new changes. Are you playing nice
with this one’s brother?” She points at me and smiles.
    Thank you for  bringing  up his rival,  Sophie. Is it too late  to cancel our
friendship?
    Noah  chuckles. “Don’t  insult me, I  thought I  was his dream racer. But
yes. I share all my toys with Santiago, making sure to play nice together at
recess.”
    I  roll  my  eyes at his  smug smile, questioning why  I  thought bringing
Noah here was a good idea. Just when I think he can be normal he turns into
an arrogant jerk.
    Our  exchange is saved yet again by a random guy. Based on his looks
alone, I peg him as an F1 racer.
    His  British  accent breaks up the current conversation. “Hey guys. What
an event, am I right?”

72
    Sophie and  I both  swoon at the Englishman  in front  of  us, his accent
packing a  punch. The  Brit  greets us  with  dark eyes, bronzed  skin,  and
roguish curly   hair  that no  brush  can tame.  His  unbuttoned black  shirt
displays neck tattoos trailing down  the small reveal of  his chest. He nails
the quintessential bad boy  look.  A  tattooed  hand grips  a glass tumbler,
showing off inked knuckles and fingers.
    Liam   and Noah greet  the stranger and  introduce him  as Jax,  Liam’s
teammate. No wonder barely any  women have jobs in  the F1  industry. I
doubt I’d be productive working around this hotness day in, day out.
    “Who  are these lush young ladies? You two  have been holding out on
me, I see.” He gives Liam  and Noah a wild  smile and tips his  glass up to
them.
    Sophie blushes, not  immune to his  charm. F1 hires  the lookers of  the
group. Honestly, I doubt I’m  any better off at the moment, with my cheeks
matching the color of my dress.
    “I’m   Maya Alatorre  and this is Sophie Mitchell.”  Go me for getting the
words out.
    “Quite  a duo you two have here.” He shakes his head at Liam and Noah.
    “We  wanted to keep them away from your ugly face. Don’t want to scare
the girls away before they get to  spend more time with  us.” Liam  tips his
beer in Jax’s direction before taking a swig.
    Noah suppresses a groan, barely audible over my laugh.
    “Who  knows,  maybe we can have them root  for McCoy  over  Bandini
one day. Women tend to be suckers for our  accents.” Jax lays the British
accent on real thick this time.
    “I’d   rather die than cheer for your team.” Sophie looks mock-disgusted
with a wrinkled nose and wide eyes.
    “Don’t   go saying things you don’t mean. One day in my pit  garage and
you’ll  be wishing  you  never have to leave.”  Liam  suggestively smiles at
Sophie. She smacks him on the arm before messing around with her drink
again.
    “Catch  you all  later.” Jax tips his glass toward us before he steps away
from the conversation. Sophie practically  drools on her  dress, unprepared
for the hotness that seeps out of F1 racers. I tried to warn her earlier.
    “Nice   chatting  with  you  both.  We’re  going  to  be on  our  way  now.
Thanks for the drinks,  Liam.”  I shoot him  a grin  while grabbing Sophie’s
hand and tugging her away.

73
    “The  drinks are free. Seriously, Liam, you’re strapped for cash? McCoy
not paying you enough?” Noah’s voice carries over the music.
    Liam  lets out a deep laugh while I run away from Noah because bow ties
are my kryptonite.
    Not Noah. Nope.

74
9

75
                                                    Maya






The crowd stirs with  enthusiasm as pit mechanics prepare for the Chinese
Grand Prix.  Team members  huddle around  the cars,  conducting engine
checks and ensuring everything looks good to go. It’s chaotic yet organized
all at once. Hundreds of people help run the operation, from feeding drivers
to running electrical tests on Bandini cars.
    Noah goes through his solitary pre-race ritual. I don’t  blame him for his
preference, with the immense amount of pressure during every race. Plus,
how draining fans and crowds can be. Santi and I hang out while he signs
hats and gear for fans. He likes how I keep him company, telling me it eases
his pre-race jitters. Whatever works for him.
    I  enter the suite area, silence welcoming me since most of the crew work
in the garage, making sure the cars are in top condition for the race.
    On  my way  to the bathroom, I  slam into a  firm  body, confirming  how
running into  people is becoming my specialty. A  hand grabs my arm  and
steadies me. My  eyes land on  Noah’s face,  his deep blue  eyes piercing
mine. His hand remains on my arm while goosebumps break out across my
skin.
    I   sigh  at  the  contact,  not  liking   these  uncontrollable  physiological
responses. “I’m so sorry, I should watch  where I am going.”  First Sophie,
now him.
    He  pulls  down  his  headphones. “No problem.  These halls are  pretty
tight.” His voice rumbles. Why can’t he have a nasally voice that throws me
off, something to take away part of his sex appeal? I doubt it’s too much to
ask.
    My   eyes have a mind  of  their  own, taking  a quick  peek at  his body
because I   lack   self-control.   His   race  suit   fits   snugly   against  him,
emphasizing his muscular form, the vibrant red color flattering his tan skin.
My eyes close in a useless effort to try to rid the image of him. I wish Santi
had an unattractive teammate because I’d describe this experience as the
worst kind of punishment.
    “Have  to get used to how busy it is around here on race days. What are
you up to in there? You always seem quiet.” I point my head in the direction

76
of his door.
    He taps his headphones. “I listen to music and get in the mental state for
racing. Give myself a pep talk and work out.”
    “You  need a pep talk?  I  can’t believe  it.  I thought  the fantastic Noah
Slade could do no wrong, with  no feat too  scary.” I look  up at the ceiling
wistfully  as I place a hand on my heart.
    His  smirk  falls,  but  he  recovers quickly.  “Even  the best need  to get
motivated. We drive cars at super speeds, so it can still be intimidating  as
fuck.”
    His  arm grabs mine again and pulls  me toward the  wall. An  attendant
runs by, hands full of car parts and bags.
    “Gotta  be careful around here. You’re small enough to be run over by a
cart or something.”
    I  look up  into Noah’s eyes and immediately regret it. His shade of blue
easily becomes my favorite, reminding me of Barcelona’s coastal waters.
    “Good   to  know.  I’ll    leave  you  to  it   then.”  My   hand  taps  on  his
headphones before I turn toward Santi’s room.  I need distance from  him,
anything to break his arm away from mine.
    “Wait.”   A calloused hand strokes my arm again, heating my skin where
his  touch  lingers.   Noah’s  lack   of  personal  space  frustrates  me.  His
touchiness overwhelms me and overrides my brain, making me crave him.
My body refuses to follow my brain’s memo about Noah being bad news.
    “Uh…”   I can’t form logical  sentences while his hand lingers on my arm.
    Not  sure where this is going, a feeling of uneasiness flows through me.
    Noah  speaks up. “Why   do you  spend time  with  your  brother  before
races? It’s distracting.”
    I  blink  once, twice.  And one more time  for  good measure. Okay then,
who died and made you king?
    His  fingers trace patterns on my skin like he didn’t say something rude. I
doubt he grasps how his words come across to others. Why would he when
he always gets what he wants anyway, and is never  told the words  no or
please. Entitled prick.
    Dislike  rolls  through me at  the response my body has toward him, the
way my heartbeat picks up at his touch, and how it ignites something inside
of me. I  stare at his hands and will  them  away. He has strong hands that
look large enough to  dominate. Ones I want  to feel  on me, touching  and
squeezing.

77
    My   physical restraint around him  is commendable. I  deserve my own
trophy and champagne shower, especially when his intoxicating clean scent
confuses me. He makes it challenging to think about anything but him.
    “It’s   not  disturbing  to my  brother  and that’s  who matters to  me.  No
offense.” My breathy voice doesn’t pack the punch I intend. I blame Noah’s
stupid hands for   disrupting  my  brain cells,  making  me  unable to  form
coherent sentences.
    “I   can hear  you  through the  walls  sometimes, your laughs  included.
Must be fun in there.”
    My   body  tenses at  his  admission.  He  sounds sincere. Maybe  even
wistful? I  can’t tell  if I  am imagining things, guessing emotions that could
be wrong.
    “I’ll   be sure to keep my voice down and not laugh too much. Don’t want
to disturb the Champ and all.” Sarcasm packs a blow this time around. High
five to myself.
    I  confidently gaze into Noah’s eyes again as he lets out a deep sigh. “I’m
sorry. I didn’t mean to offend you.”
    A little  too late for that.
    My  gaze remains on his face, silently encouraging him to continue. I can
wait for apologies.
    “I’m   not used to you or Santi being here. It’s usually quiet on race days.
My old  teammate was like me; he typically  listened to  music and worked
out. He took naps too. I don’t mean to make you feel bad about it so please
don’t take  it  the wrong  way.” He  shifts  his weight  from  one foot  to the
other.
    He  comes  across genuine at  least.  His  hand  runs through  his  hair,
making the  dark strands stick  up everywhere. A   typical  look  for  him. I
smile at his state of  disarray, aware I’ve found  Noah’s nervous tick. Who
would have guessed the hotshot had one?
    “It’s   okay. I  don’t want  to be distracting for  anyone either. I’ll   keep it
down.” I offer a sincere smile.
    “All   right, thanks.” He turns toward his door.
    “Noah,”  His  name rolls off  my tongue, prompting him  to look  over his
shoulder. “Good luck today.”
    “Thank  you.”
    Part of  my heart melts at the sight of  him winking  before he closes the
door.

78
    I  lean against a wall and wait for my heart to stop racing. Once I finally
relax, I enter Santi’s room again.





Liam leads the group  today with  pole position.  Finally, a  change of pace
from Noah’s usual P1 spot, with my brother as runner-up, and Noah in P3.
A third-place qualifier  for  Mr. Slade. What a tragedy. Bandini and McCoy
outperform other racers every time, which seems unfair since money makes
all the difference in a sport like  this. Top teams hire the best engineers and
crew. A  couple  others follow   close behind,  working  toward  upper grid
positions and better cars.
    Racers take off  down  the course once the  lights fade  from  above the
grid. The smell of fuel fills  the air, strangely calming me. My hands clap as
cars drive  by. I   love standing  near the  track’s safety  fence, feeling  the
vibrations of the engines as the cars rip past the lane, metal rings trembling
underneath my fingers as I clutch the barrier.
    On TV, cars may look like they hit normal speeds. But in person, F1 race
cars rush past in  a blur  of  colors and a  burst of  air, the  roar of  engines
rivaling the crowd’s  cheers. My dark waves blow in the wind  as Bandini’s
red cars fly by. The fast pace makes it difficult to tell which car Noah drives
versus Santi, making me tune in to the speakers for race standings. Sparks
fly as cars brush up against the pavement. Others cruise by, a mix of colors
ranging from  gray to pink.  Race car models vary  from  sleek to clunky.  I
film  the event from the sidelines today, wanting to stand at a popular turn
overlooking the finish line.
    No  significant hiccups occur within  the first twenty minutes. During the
twelfth lap, a driver runs into a barrier, his car hitting  protective blockades.
Water splashes against the road from  exploding  plastic  jugs. The  driver
unbuckles himself and yells expletives before throwing his helmet. He ends
up kneeling  next  to his  wrecked  car, his  body tense and  shaking. Fans
underestimate how emotional  racers get  when  they  crash. A  failure   to
complete a Prix. After all  the hard work and sacrifices from the team, they
retire with no points for the Championship.
    I  turn  my camera back toward  the racetrack, getting fantastic shots of
McCoy and Bandini cars rushing by, metal frames nearly touching as they

79
try to pass each other. The howl of the engines brings a smile to my lips.
    Liam  and  Noah fight  it  out  for first   and second place throughout the
forty laps. Excitement  has yet to wear off  after the first  hour of  watching
them compete against each other, the crowd’s still yelling chants and cheers.
My  legs cramp at standing for  an hour and a  half. In  hindsight, I  should
have packed a chair and snacks.
    By   lap fifty,   my  brother  tails  Noah’s race  car. Santi’s defensiveness
keeps me on edge. I grip  the fence as they  careen down the track, Noah
holding  his lead.  Santi’s car  hangs uncomfortably  close to  Noah’s.  Too
freaking close. During  a straight stretch, my  brother speeds up before he
swerves while trying to get around Noah.
    I  gasp as the front wing of my brother’s car hits the back of Noah’s race
car. Santi spirals out behind him, both cars trembling as they drag across the
pavement. My  brother has crashed into  Noah at  about one hundred and
eighty miles  per hour. The Bandini  cars spin around like  two  red yo-yos
across the track, the drivers unable to do anything about the loss of control.
My stomach lurches. The crowd quiets and listens to the  grating sound of
metal, a path of sparks and smoke trailing  behind the Bandini  cars. Their
cars finally stop near a side barrier. Smoke plumes from both engines and
billows up into the blue sky.
    Shit. Noah and Santi climb out of their cars. The safety team ensures that
the drivers remain uninjured while a tractor picks up the messed-up Bandini
cars with a crane. Noah flails his arms around at my brother. He throws his
helmet off to the side while he grabs my brother by the race suit and pushes
him. My brother catches his footing before he falls over.
    I  take in a deep breath, relief rushing through me that they both are safe.
The risk of  crashing always hangs over the heads of drivers in  this sport.
Some have died during crashes like today. But most racers get out of their
cars unharmed because of all the safety precautions like fireproof race suits,
helmets, and the bar above the car that protects the driver from barrel rolls.
This crash proves why F1 has safety protocols in the first place.
    The broadcaster announces how Noah and Santi will retire for the Prix,
the worst news for the Bandini team. A  major loss since neither racer will
receive points for the Constructors’ Championship. Plus, it’s a strike against
my brother’s confidence.
    I  wait  for  them in the  pit suites, in  the same hallway where I  ran into
Noah earlier. Noah and Santi make their presence known the moment they

80
enter.
    “What  the fuck  were you thinking? What type of  reckless, amateur shit
are you trying to pull here? That crappy move cost us everything today.”
    My  body stiffens at the way Noah talks to my brother. I peek around the
hall’s corner, wanting  to  get a  look of  the  scene. Noah’s back faces me
while my  brother looks furious,  a rare happening for him.  He has flushed
cheeks, narrowed eyes, and pinched brows.
    My  brother’s eyes flare. “I  already said I’m  sorry twice,  Slade. Do you
want to kiss and make up?”
    Last-name  dropping  and the  sarcasm dripping  from  Santi’s  voice  is
never a good sign.
    “If   you want to prove your worth, try to do it without crashing a million-
dollar car. It’ll   serve you better in the long  run. But if  you  wanted to ride
my cock,  all  you  had to  do was  ask nicely.”  Noah’s  hard voice  carries
through the halls.
    “Fuck  you.  You act like  your  God’s gift  to Earth.  Newsflash, I’ll   beat
you one day and so will everyone else. Get over yourself.”
    My   eyes strain and  I  press a hand  against my  mouth. Noah  doesn’t
respond. He turns toward my  hiding  place in  the hallway  and practically
runs me over on his way to  his room. His  hands grab onto me, stabilizing
my body before I topple over.
    Dull  eyes and rosy cheeks greet me.
    “Sorry,”  he mumbles before shutting the door to his room.
    My  heart squeezes at how unhappy he looks. I don’t want to feel bad for
him because he acts like a dick to my brother, but I can’t help pitying him.
It sucks how my brother made a stupid move that has severe repercussions
for the team. Points aside, morale between these two can’t be lower.
    I  enter Santi’s suite to  sit on the  couch when Noah’s phone rings next
door. He rarely gets phone calls, so I can’t fight my curiosity. I try  my best
not to listen in on what happens in his suite. And by trying my best, I mean
I currently have a cup held up against the wall  to try  to amplify  the noise.
All I  get are muffled words. A pretty unsuccessful spy mission if I do say so
myself, my ears only catching a few words like father and crash.
    Santi  comes into  the room while  I  google  how people use glasses to
eavesdrop. He eyes  the  empty  cup  in  my  hand  curiously  but  doesn’t
mention anything about it, choosing to ignore my playful smile.

81
    Santi  plops himself  on  the couch next  to me  and lets out  a sigh,  the
defeated look on his face pulling at my heartstrings. His fingers fumble with
unzipping his race suit while his feet toe off  his sneakers. He puts his head
in his hands. The room fills with the sound of his deep breaths in and out.
    I  give  him a few  moments before I  probe. “How  did the talk  with  the
chief engineer and Noah go?”
    I  learn from my mistakes, making sure to keep my voice low enough for
Noah to not overhear us.
    “Noah’s  pissed to say the least. And I get it because I fucked up bad. But
I apologized to  him the moment we  got out of  the cars and when we got
back here. I hadn’t even seen the footage yet, but I knew it was my fault.”
    “He  shouldn’t have yelled at you like that in front of everyone, making a
scene. It’s wrong and embarrassing for both of you. And not  mature when
you already said sorry.”
    Okay, the volume of my voice has increased a bit. Noah may or may not
be listening in on our conversation at this moment, no thanks to me.
    “I  screwed him out of a good amount of points. It’s going to take time to
recover from that loss. I would be angry too if  it  were me.” His hands pull
at his hair while his face stares at the floor.
    “You  both are teammates trying to figure each other out. The two of you
have different styles of racing, and you need to find your groove and work
together.” I   root  for   both  of  them.  For  the  sake  of  Bandini   and  the
Constructors, they need to put aside this rivalry between them.
    “F1  Corp will   make us do a post-race conference together to represent
Bandini.” He  looks up at me finally.  His  red-rimmed eyes lack their usual
shine, and his sadness makes my heart hurt for him.
    I  take a deep breath, knowing what I have to do.  “I’ll   join you.  What’s
the worst that could happen? It’s not like you can crash again.”
    Famous last words.





The press meeting is not the same as watching Santi and Noah crash in real
life. On the racetrack, you can’t see or feel the tension between the drivers.
Except for the team radio, but not  many people listen in unless the videos
end up on YouTube.

82
    See, in  a  press meeting, all  the emotions hang around like   unwanted
female groupies. Reporters salivate at the idea of these two guys sitting on a
duo panel. Tension fills the room like a dense cloud, my brother shifting in
his seat while Noah’s  gaze focuses on the bright lights  in  front of  him.  I
cringe at the awkwardness between them. The guys have many cameras on
them, making it hard to hide anything.
    I  take back my previous comments about press conferences being yawn-
worthy. I’d take snooze fests over train wrecks any day of the week.
    Noah’s jaw ticks when the reporter asks Santi a question.
    “It  shouldn’t  have happened today. Our team lost a lot of points because
of it.”
    The reporter doesn’t let Santi off easily because good answers don’t sell
magazine covers.
    “Is  it true that the team engineer told you to brake the car and pull off of
Noah’s tail, but you didn’t listen?”
    My  brother  moves around in his  seat. “I  don’t want  to discuss it.  The
team already lost today. It’s bad for us. Do we need to harp on the logistics
of how I messed up?”
    Noah  subtly shakes his head before his sharp eyes look straight ahead.
He replaced his tight race suit with  a sponsor polo shirt,  his hair pressing
smoothly against his scalp with not a single dark strand out of  place yet. I
prefer his charming wickedness over this sad state any day of the week. His
arms cross against his chest, bringing  my  attention toward  the ridges of
muscle etched into them, tan skin gleaming under bright lights.
    I  check out reporters around the room, searching for any distractions, but
my eyes drift back to the press table and roam over Noah again. Ugh. Why
does he have to be my brother’s racing rival?
    I   shift  on  my  feet,  my  sneakers scuffing  against the  slick  tile.  My
attention snaps back to my brother, choosing to ignore my attraction toward
Noah because I don’t want to accept those feelings. Instead, I list off all the
reasons Noah’s bad news in my head.
    It’s way too soon.
    I  barely know him.
    He’s my brother’s teammate. Rival even.
    He’s  a  manwhore with  more  hookups than  all  the  Bachelor seasons
combined.
    He looks like he’ll  screw with my head as well as he’ll screw me in bed.

83
    Working  out all of  the reasons why Noah Slade is a bad idea is a useful
distraction, keeping me away from the drama ensuing in front of me.
    I   tune in  again when  the reporters decide  to move  their  attention to
Noah.
    “Noah,  tell us your thoughts on the situation.”
    These reporters decide today is the day for such open-ended inquiries.
    “It’s    a  shitty   situation   that  should   have  never  happened.  Santi’s
apologized and we are sorry. Our racing  team has to fix  our  mistake and
we’re appreciative of their efforts to get our cars up and running for the next
race. We love this sport, bad accidents aside. We’re not in it to retire early
from the race and go home empty-handed. This is the worst-case example
of teamwork, but we’ll work on it.”
    He handles questions like a professional. Not bad.
    My  brother visibly relaxes in his seat, relief evident in his eyes.
    My  expectations for today didn’t include Noah acting like such a pro. He
pushes aside his  earlier  bad mood  in  front   of  the  cameras, presenting
himself as the ultimate teammate. I can see why Bandini keeps him around
besides his talent behind the wheel. His appearance makes it obvious why
women gravitate toward him, with him  being such a smooth talker, willing
to put on a show.
    The rest of the conference is dull. I sneak glances at Noah because what
is a girl to do during  the rest of a boring meeting. He catches me staring at
him, making my cheeks flush.
    And  that wicked smile he sends me when the cameras stop rolling? The
one promising more? Yup. I see it.
    Oh man, I’m in  trouble.

84
10

85
                                                    Noah






Maya totally tries to hide how she checks me out. I no longer think its mild
curiosity, chalking  up  her  initial  reactions  as her  way of   sizing  up her
brother’s new teammate. But we’ve danced around each other for a month
—ever  since  the  season started, glancing  at  each  other  and  avoiding
physical contact. She fills me with  a different  excitement—because of her
and the reactions she thinks go unnoticed.
    My  new relationship with  Santi is already off to  a bad start. No need to
fuck it up more with  a quick hookup, no matter how hot his sister is. And I
mean she is a drop-dead gorgeous woman. Thoughts plague me about ways
I would defile her like wrapping her ponytail  around my arm while her lush
lips wrap  around my  cock,  pump  after pump  until  I  finish.  I’m   a dirty
bastard, but I can’t do that to my teammate—no matter how much I want to.
So I lock up my fantasies for another time with another girl.
    I  don’t shit where I sleep. Period. End of story.
    My  dick retaliates against my brain though because I peek glances at her
across the Bandini garage. I could lie to myself and say its sheer curiosity.
Based on the way  my  cock hardens around her, it’s  more than that,  and
frustration runs through me at denying myself.
    I’m  ashamed to admit I jerk off  in the bathroom sometimes after seeing
Maya. No use denying my terrible habit. It happens mainly after races, with
all the pent-up adrenaline begging for release. But she always hangs around,
so lately I’ve been taking a lot  of cold showers, trying to rid  the images of
her from my head. She wears these tight shorts that show off her tan legs,
plus she looks fucking fantastic in Bandini shirts. It brings out a possessive
side of me, happy to  see her in my  team’s colors, bobbing around the pit
garage with her camera.
    Can  I  ask the  chief  to ban  attire like  hers  altogether from  Bandini’s
motorhome? May solve half of my problems.
    She bends over the cockpit of  Santi’s car, checking out the inside with
one of the engine mechanics.
    The mechanic darts his eyes everywhere except on Maya’s jean-clad ass
hanging in the air. Thank God she didn’t wear her scrappy shorts that look

86
shredded and two washes away from  breaking  apart. I  can only  take so
much. She doesn’t even notice how the pit barely buzzes with noise as she
busies herself with filming the inside of Santi’s car for her vlog.
    I   shift  my  jeans  because my aching  cock  is  pulsing  uncomfortably
against my zipper. My  eyes glance around the rest of  the room,  catching
how the pit crew steals glances at her perky ass. And I don’t like it one bit.
Where the fuck is Santiago when you need him?
    Santiago, please come collect your sister. She fucks up everyone’s work
schedule.
    Thank  God Maya  finally  pops her  head out. Her  hair lacks  her usual
ponytail with  wavy brown strands flowing  down her back and framing her
face. I’d consider her angelic-looking, except her body is meant for sin—to
fuck hard and long. My type of damnation. I suppress a laugh at the comical
display of many heads snapping back to their jobs. A hum of drills and the
beeps of computers start back up again, heads no longer facing in Maya’s
direction.
    Her smile beams at me once I catch her attention, filling my chest with a
kind of  warmth I don’t  recognize often. I  return her smile with  one of my
own because I’m not a total asshole. My eyes snap toward the small black
camera and tripod she grips in her tiny  hand, the lens taunting  me as she
inches toward me.
    Ah, explains the warm smile. I shake my head at her cleverness, a smirk
replacing my grin.
    “And  here we have Bandini’s  finest, but not to  me because I still think
my brother is the best. It’s Noah Slade. Say hi to everyone.” She points the
thing directly up at me, not asking for approval. I like how she’s the type to
ask for forgiveness instead of permission. Reminds me of myself.
    I  don’t  like interviews  that aren’t mandatory. But fuck it,  if  it helps her
get new followers, I can go along with it.
    A  megawatt smile breaks out across my face. I lie and tell myself I do it
for the fans, but my dick and I both know what’s up.
    “A  real vlogger shouldn’t be biased,” I grumble.
    Her  soft and breathy laugh makes the tripod shake, and damn if it isn’t
the best sound I’ll    hear all  day. What  other noises can  I  get her  to  do
between the two of us?
    Get your head out of the pit lane, Noah.

87
    “More   on  that  later,  everyone. So,  Noah.”  My   stiff  cock  stands to
attention at the way my name rolls off her tongue, sultry and lulling  on the
vowels. I shift my feet subtly to ease the ache.
    I  would love  to hear her repeat my name under different circumstances.
Behind closed doors, where no one can hear us, preferably without clothes
on.
    What  a sick joke on me where I crave attention from the one girl I want
but can’t  have. And  even worse, she remains oblivious.  I  want to  spend
more time around her and suck up  her happiness like the goddamn black
hole I am.
    Maya  resumes, unaware of my inner conflict. “Would  you want to give
the fans a tour of your own car?” She bats her eyelashes, laying the charm
on real thick. Her  brown eyes gleam up at me. Damn, who the fuck could
resist looks like that?
    “Sure, fuck  it. Why not.”
    Nice, Noah. Cursing on camera.
    Her  head bobs with  excitement at  my agreement. Knowing  her, she’s
resisting clapping her hands because of the camera.
    We walk  over to  my car. Engineers take the cover off  to give me  easy
cockpit access. My hand drags across the front of the car, giving the hood
extra attention. Maya’s eyes darken as she focuses on my  hands. Further
evidence that she is affected by me too, proving our  attraction is not one-
sided. My brain logs this information for another time.
    If  she wasn’t Santi’s sister, I would invite her back to my hotel room and
show her a good time, help her give into temptation. But since she is, I have
to be respectful. Not typically my status quo.
    I  do it for the good of the team of course.
    “Care to share with viewers what it’s like behind the wheel?” Her lips tip
upward.
    I  nudge a  pit crew  attendant. “Hey, can you  grab my  steering wheel?
Please.” He hurries away at my request.
    “While   we wait,  I’ll  give  fans a tour. New  watchers of the sport don’t
know  how  we   F1  drivers  are  practically   lying   down  inside  the  car.
Sometimes it’s even hard to see over our steering wheels. Makes turns more
difficult  if you can imagine.” I casually lean against the car.
    Maya’s bright  smile encourages me to keep going.

88
    “Depending  on the type  of damage we sustain during the  race, the pit
crew may have the spare part needed to fix it. Here’s the wheel now.” Maya
steps into me, angling the camera to get a good shot. I inhale the fresh floral
scent of her perfume, a recognizably addicting smell.
    I  explain the mechanism and buttons on the wheel. Bandini likes to keep
tight-lipped about our technology, so I  withhold  spilling any  trade secrets.
Maya nods along while paying attention to everything I say. Her head bobs,
and small  smiles make  my  heart clench—a  new  sensation that spreads
through my chest, unlike any feeling from winning a race.
    I  wrap up my explanations. She flips the camera screen up and turns the
tripod toward the two of us. Her body presses against my side as she tries to
get us both in the frame, distracting me with the contact of her skin.
    I  shake my head at her attempt to film  us together with her short arms.
The camera cuts off part of my head, prompting me to grab the tripod  and
fix the angle to  fit us in  the frame. Her intoxicating  scent washes over me
again. The smell of  her turns me on, like  fucked-up pheromones drawing
me in, showing how screwed I am.
    “And   that’s what it’s  like  behind a driver’s  steering wheel. Next week
I’ll  be meeting up with the pit crew as they tackle the Russian Grand Prix.”
    I  smile down at her. Her enthusiasm about her vlogging rubs off on me,
uncharacteristically agreeing to this segment despite my usual distaste for
these kinds of things. Not to mention how  I check out her Instagram daily
since she approved my request. My dirty little secret.
    I  lie  to myself about how I  don’t want to  miss out on her vlogs when I
appear in them. But I have a hard time convincing myself when I check out
her travel  videos too,  curious about what  she does during  her free  time
away from the racetrack.
    “Any   last words you want to share with Bandini  fans?” She nudges me
with her elbow.
    “Tune in  next week to see me kick Santiago’s ass.” I smile at the camera.
    She laughs and elbows me harder this time, the tiny bone barely making
a dent.
    “Spoken like  the conceited athlete we all know. See you next time.” She
waves goodbye to the camera and shuts it off. I take in one last breath of her
addicting smell before she pulls away, the heat of her body gone.
    Yup. I’m a sick motherfucker.

89
    “Thanks  for  doing that. I  wasn’t sure if  you would,  to be honest.” She
tucks a loose lock of hair behind her ear.
    Her  nervousness comes back  in  full   force, guilt   tugging  at the  few
heartstrings I have left. I can’t help being an asshole.
    “No   problem. Can’t have you  only  showing Santiago’s side of  things.
It’s good PR for the company anyway.” Right. I  have trouble believing my
own lie despite how easily it flows off my tongue.
    “Yeah sure…”  Her voice tells me she doesn’t buy my brand of bullshit.
“Maybe you can join  another time again. I better get going since I have to
edit all of  this before the race tomorrow. Congrats on your pole position.”
She sends me one last smile over her shoulder.
    “Thank  you.”
    She walks away before the last word leaves my lips.

90
11

91
                                                    Maya






I  upload the video  I  filmed  in  the  garage where Noah made his  cameo
appearance. The comments section floods with positivity  and excitement.
People share how they’re  happy to  see Noah in  a  more relaxed setting,
away from the press circuit and racetrack. Hard to miss the barrage of horny
women asking to be Noah’s baby mama.
    With  every day I spend around Noah, I learn more about who he is once
the cameras stop rolling. Before qualifiers,  he likes to  drink  two espresso
shots, which can result in him bouncing off the walls for a solid hour. Turns
out he loves to chat while espresso runs through his veins. He also enjoys a
session of yoga early in the morning before race days, a tradition he invited
me to  join  during the  last Prix.  Safe to  say yoga  is not  my  workout  of
choice. Namaste in bed, thank you very much.
    Noah even tugs on my ponytail now whenever he passes by me. At some
point, lines blurred as we accepted a new level of  comfortability  with  one
another.
    I  learn details about him that chip away at my resolve, making it hard to
resist him. He no  longer is just  a conceited guy who  makes my eyes roll
into the back of my head. Don’t get me wrong, he still  acts smug as hell—
that has not changed. But I like it.  The more time I  spend around him, the
more he draws me in.
    Imagine my surprise when my usual mantras won’t work anymore.
    Not  even I’m only up to good.
    Because I want to be really bad.
    Hooking  up with  Noah  is the same as picking up  two BOGO  pints of
Ben and Jerry’s.  It  sounds and tastes like  a great  idea at first.   But  you
overestimate your self-control, and next thing you know, the whole thing is
gone and you have a stomachache.
    Basically, Noah is a heartache disguised in pretty packaging. He has the
same allure as a pint of Chocolate Fudge Brownie ice cream.
    And  no sex on Earth is worth his kind of trouble.
    See, Mom, I told you I would try to be more responsible! Look at me go.

92
    The  current standings of the F1  World Championship include Noah  in
first place, Liam in second, and Santi in third. My brother bounces back up
the ranks after his second-place performance in Sochi.
    Noah  is a  force to  be reckoned with.  His confidence is  well-deserved
because the guy is a badass behind the wheel with spot-on instincts and fast
reflexes. My  brother  could  learn a  lot  from  him  if  they  put  aside their
dislike for  each other. Things  have been tense since the Shanghai fender
bender, their dynamic not entirely back  to normal despite how two  weeks
have passed.
    The best thing about this next Grand Prix is that we get to go back home
to Spain. I can practically taste the sangria and paella, along with the shores
of Barcelona, calling  my name. Our parents will  visit  us and watch  Santi
race. We look forward to returning to our home country after being gone for
two months because time flies by while on the road.
    Hence why  my  resolve slips around Noah. We’ve  played around each
other for  months, with me  putting in  extra effort  to resist  his sex appeal.
Hard stuff when he wears his race suit.
    Our  driver  drops us off  at  the F1 paddock area. My  eyes widen  with
surprise  as  I   take  in   all  the   different   style  buildings   made  out   of
motorhomes. A distinct setup compared to previous races.
    No  words pass my lips  as we walk  down the row  of  uniquely colored
buildings. Each team has their own motorhome with  dining halls, meeting
rooms, and larger  suites. The  building  allows  for   a place  of  relaxation
during the hustle and bustle of the busy race week. We still have our hotel
rooms to sleep in,  but this  is  where Santi and Noah  spend a lot of  their
downtime.
    We stop next to Bandini’s  motorhome. Red paint gleams under the sun,
looking sleek and modern while still carrying the classic feel of the brand.
    The  motorhome has a luxurious feel when compared to pit  suites from
the flyaway  races. People hang by the  bar and restaurant on  the bottom
floor.  Santi shows me  the  upper levels,  including  private  suites and an
outdoor patio where I  see myself setting up my  laptop to  edit videos and
content.
    Bandini’s   motorhome shows how  much  funding  the  brand has from
sponsors, including    Noah’s  dad,   who   invests  heavily   in   the   team.
Supposedly it looks good to have a previous race legend backing a brand.
    I  get tugged to the side before I can enter the suite.

93
    “I   need your help,”  Sophie  whispers despite us standing in  an empty
hall. Her wide green eyes and heavy breathing make me hesitant.
    “With  what? And why are you whispering?”
    “I  was invited on a date.” She chews on her cheek.
    “That’s  great! Do you need help picking out an outfit?” Her glare makes
me stop clapping my hands together. “Or not?”
    “Not.   This is  the worst thing.  Liam bet  if  he placed on the podium  in
Russia, we would  have to go  on a date. I  stupidly  agreed because I was
buzzed at a sponsor event. Plus, his  previous track  history in  Sochi was
awful so I didn’t think he would actually make it.”
    My  eyes widen. “Oh, you didn’t.” Bets never ever end well.
    “Tragic,  I know. So I’m  going to  go because I don’t rescind bets. But…
he never specified the type of date.” Her smug grin sets off a few alarms.
    “Am   I missing out on different  types?” Not exactly connecting the dots
here.
    “I’m   going on  a double date. And you’re  coming with  me.”  Her small
hands grip my arms.
    “What!  No way,” I  sputter.
    She’s crazy. The last thing I want to do is go on a double date with them.
Talk about awkward. Sophie and Liam have enough sexual tension between
the two of them to make me sweat. And I highly doubt Liam wants a double
date to start with, seeing as he salivates when Sophie gets close.
    “It’ll   be us, Liam, and Jax. You remember him, right? British, hot, looks
like he wants you to call him daddy in bed. It’s a win-win for us.” She gives
me a sickly-sweet smile.
    I  burst out laughing. “Where do you even come up with this stuff?”
    “I’m   full  of ideas. Will you do it for  me? Your only friend here?” Sophie
clasps her hands together and rocks back and forth on her feet. She plays
the innocent card  well.  I  grimace at  how  it  works  on me,  a sucker  for
helping others no matter how bad the idea sounds.
    “I’m   game. But I’m only doing this for you. When is it?”
    “Tonight!   Before they get busy with  the pre-racing  stuff.”  Sophie rubs
her necklace. She throws this on me in the same day, how thoughtful.
    Lovely. I’m  bursting with excitement here.
    “My  brother is going to kill  me,” I mutter.
    “Oh,  nonsense. He hooks up with a few  ladies on the side anyway. He
gets it.”

94
    Who the hell says things like that? She should count herself lucky that I
like her and she’s one of my only friends here.
    “Ugh,  come on. Get a filter. Gross.” I  stick my tongue out at her. That’s
absolutely the last thing I want to hear about, like ever. Right up there with
hearing how my parents still have sex together.
    “We  better go pick out our  outfits. We should look our best.”  She grips
my hand in  hers, demonstrating a shocking amount of strength for  a tiny
person.
    The  whole  thing may  be a terrible  idea, but  at least I  can  look good
while doing it.
    We  end up going shopping together around the  streets of Barcelona. I
don’t mind because I love feeling surrounded by my type of people for the
first time in  months. Hearing others speak Spanish and smelling fresh food
from different restaurants makes me feel at home.
    Sophie and I grab lunch together at one of the local spots. We chat while
stuffing our faces with  tapas, draining the contents of our sangria glasses.
Home sweet home.
    Sophie’s  cheeks flush,  alcohol  getting  to  her  head, as she admits  a
fascinating tidbit of information to me.
    “One  of  the reasons I’m stuck going on  this date isn’t only  because of
the bet.” She lets out a deep breath.
    My  eyebrows draw up. I  keep quiet, not wanting to interrupt  and make
her lose her nerve. Call me curious to get more information  about her and
Liam.
    Sophie rattles  on. “I  created a Fuck  It  list  for my  time  traveling with
Bandini. Basically,  it’s  a mix  of  different  things I  googled,  from normal
bucket list stuff to sexy items.”
    I  choke on my drink. “Did  sweet Sophie come up with a naughty bucket
list? How bold  of you.”  I waggle my  brows at her. She snorts, not holding
back.
    “I   was tired of  living  the  perfect life  my dad  wanted. So I  decided to
create a list before I  came here.”  She pulls out  a small laminated square
from her  purse, unfolding  the page so it  becomes the size of  a standard
piece of paper. I have no clue how she did that.
    I  check out the different items, my eyebrows rising at a few of them.
    “Then  what’s the connection to Liam?”
    “Well…remember  the time we sang karaoke in Shanghai?”

95
    I  nod my head.
    She swallows  a gulp of  sangria before continuing. “The  list fell  out of
my bag and Liam grabbed it. He knows about it  and added, ‘Go on a date
with a bad boy.’ See?”
    Black  scrawl  mars the  bottom of  the  page, messing up her  perfectly
color-coded list of items. Dots connect in my head.
    “Oh  my God, he offered to help with these?”
    Red flush crawls from Sophie’s neck to her cheeks.
    “I  only  agreed to this one date. That’s it, no others because I don’t want
his help. No  matter how  hard he tries.  But  I  wanted to tell  you  because
we’re  friends and  all,  which  means we share everything  together.”  Her
honesty fills me with  happiness because our friendship has reached a new
level of trust.





My brother did, in fact, disagree with the date. Not a shocker.
    He  paces the floor  of  my  room  while  I  finish  getting  ready, his feet
dragging across the carpet while  he mumbles to  himself. I  snicker  as he
runs a hand down his face for the fourth time today.
    “You’re  going to give  yourself wrinkles by thirty  if  you keep that up.” I
point to  his face with  my  mascara wand. He crosses his arms against his
chest and scowls at me.
    “Why  Jax and Liam? Seriously, it couldn’t be anyone besides them?”
    I  give him a pointed look. Yeah, right. Imagine if I  had said Noah asked
me on a date.
    “What   about the nice  guy  you  talked to  at the  press conference last
week? Nerdy, has a combover, but can ask a decent question?”
    If  the combover isn’t enough to ward me away, the suspenders are a hard
no.
    I  shake my head at him and exhale. “It’s a favor for Sophie. She begged
me to join her because she didn’t want to go alone with Liam. So here I am.
No need to freak out about it.”
    He  should congratulate me for  sacrificing  myself for  the greater good
and my friendship.
    “Do  you need to wear that?”

96
    I  look down at my short red dress and shrug. “Eh, it’s cute. I don’t want
to be underdressed since we’re going to a nice restaurant.”
    A  growl  of frustration leaves his lips. His overprotection may be sweet,
but the charm wears off pretty quickly when I deal with it weekly.
    “Don’t   worry, big bro. I’m  not  even interested in Jax. I would rather be
in the hotel room in my  pajamas than going out right now.” I find  minimal
appeal in attending a fancy dinner, unlike my brother who lives for this life,
with crowds of people feeding his energy. He loves the glam and glitz of the
F1 community. But  me? I prefer  a cozy life  of  snuggling up with  a good
book or a new TV show.
    I  shudder at  the thought  of  him  hooking  up with   other girls.  Damn,
Sophie, why did you have to tell me about that?
    “Fine,  but  try to  be back here before midnight.  I won’t  be able  to fall
asleep thinking you’re  out  there with  them.”  He doesn’t have  to tell  me
twice because I like midnight bedtimes.
    The last thing my  brother hears is my laugh as I exit the hotel room, the
door thudding behind my back. My eyes meet Noah’s as he exits his room.
    Seriously, he stays on our same floor?
    These run-ins are becoming way  too common with  us. It  concerns me
since I feel like he’s wearing me down, little by little.
    His  gaze explores my body  before he closes his eyes, his lips  moving
like he’s saying a silent prayer. His reaction tells me I get a gold star for the
red dress choice.
    I  giggle  at the sight of  him  being rattled, which  is so unlike  his  usual
calm and collected self.
    “Going  somewhere?” His blue eyes reflect two  dark pools. My  breaths
shallow as his eyes rake down my body again. He follows me to the hotel’s
elevator bank, meeting my strides, step for step.
    I  take a deep breath before I respond to him. But I realize a little too late
how much of  a terrible  idea it  is as his  smell engulfs  me and makes my
brain foggy.
    Clean, fresh, bone-jumping worthy.
    Another  deep inhale before I speak. “Yeah, I’m going to dinner since we
have a free night and all.”
    Wednesdays are relaxation days for crew and people like me who don’t
have to do too much.

97
    He  presses the  elevator button  and  turns toward  me.  “Few  and  far
between with  such a  busy race schedule. Who  are you  going  to dinner
with?”
    All  right, back to asking about the date.
    “Sophie, and uh, Liam…and Jax.” My execution is anything but smooth.
    He remains silent as he checks out my outfit again, lingering on my legs
before his eyes meet mine. I  send a prayer for someone to get me out  of
here ASAP. The elevator takes forever, the lit-up  button taunting  me as I
will it  to come quicker.
    “Hmm,  I  didn’t get an invite.”  He pulls  his phone out of his pocket and
scrolls through it,  searching for  an invite  that  never happened. I use the
opportunity to check him  out. Powerful forearms taunt me, on full  display
because of his rolled-up button-down  shirt, along  with  jeans that hug his
tight ass and muscular legs. His dark hair is slicked back, not yet disturbed
by his fingers. My teeth bite down on my bottom lip to suppress a groan.
    His  lips turn down as he locks his phone, making me feel both satisfied
and sad for   him.  Is  it  possible  to  have such  a  mix?  Noah  screws up
everything inside of me, including my common sense.
    I  shrug at his response, playing it off even though my heart races in my
chest. “Maybe they thought you were busy. We’ll be sure to invite you next
time.”
    We won’t because there can’t be a next time.
    The  doors  open. Thank  the  Lord.  We both  enter  at  the same time,
brushing against each other. My   body  responds to the  physical contact,
desperately wanting more, but my  brain makes a wise decision  to situate
myself in the opposite corner of the elevator.
    “Yeah,  maybe. Where  are you  having dinner  then?”  He runs  a hand
through his hair, now  messing it up  like  I knew  he would.  I smirk  at his
signature style.
    “I   think it’s  called Bouquet. An expensive place I assume based on the
outfits Sophie picked out.” I bring his attention back to me. Crap.
    He  coughs. “Hmm.” One word  that has a heavy weight to it, stifling  us
in this stuffy box.
    He remains silent for the rest of the descent. Air charges as movie scenes
of couples hooking up in elevators flash through my mind. My body presses
up against the side of the cart, my hands gripping onto the cool handlebar as

98
I  rid  the dirty  thoughts  from  my  head. Our closeness and the  delicious
fumes of his cologne wreak havoc on my body.
    He  glances over at me one more time  before the doors open up to the
lobby and I dart out.  I peek over my shoulder and give him  a quick wave,
my spine tingling  at his devilish smile, feeling  his eyes on me as I power-
walk to  the group. The glint  in his  eye and the smile on his  face promise
more.
    That’s a problem for future me.
    Damn, I coined my new mantra.





We’re two drinks into the night. And dare I say, the date is turning out to be
a fun time.
    Liam  whispers a  few sweet nothings into  Sophie’s ear. Every  time he
says something to her, she takes a chug of wine like a messed-up drinking
game between the two of them.
    Jax comes across as a nice guy. A  bit withdrawn,  but funny  and edgy.
Sophie’s daddy comment pops up in my head because I mean, come on, the
guy is sexy. But  honestly, does she think he does that? She wouldn’t  say
something that ridiculous if there wasn’t a little bit of truth in it.
    Jax has curly  hair  he inherited from  a combination  of his  “mum”  and
dad, who is one of the best black boxers from the United Kingdom. He gets
his hazel eyes, sharp cheekbones, and pouty lips from his Swedish side. A
total knockout with muscles and brains to match. I ask him about his family,
but he closes himself off, switching the subject back to me.
    Jax  can check off  most people’s hot-guy boxes, but  I  can’t figure  out
what doesn’t work  for  me. Maybe  I  don’t like  tattoos? He  tells me  they
cover his body, black  ink peeking out  from the  collar of  his button-down
shirt. Intricate  designs cover his  knuckles and  right  hand. I  ask about a
couple of them, but there are too many to get into.
    When he grabs my hand across the table, my body doesn’t respond to it;
it’s  the equivalent  of  holding  a stranger’s  hand. I  frown  at  the  lack  of
flutters  in  my  stomach or  racing  heartbeat. By  the  time  we  order  our
entrees, I’ve come to the conclusion that I  don’t  feel a sexual connection,

99
which is fine  because it puts less pressure on me. Friendship sounds like a
good idea.
    “Oh,  hi,  guys. I heard you were out  here tonight. I think  my invite  got
lost in the mail.”
    My  stomach flips at the sound of Noah’s voice. I suppress the temptation
to rub my eyes as though he’d disappear from my vision.
    Heat rushes up my chest and neck. Liam  and Jax look confused, and a
surge of guilt rushes through me. Sophie kicks me under the table and I kick
her back. I  have no words to  explain what is  happening now, despite the
questionable look she sends me.
    Liam  and Jax greet him reluctantly. Sophie and I get up from the table to
give him  quick  hugs, except Noah holds  on to  me a second longer  than
necessary, a clear fuck-you to Jax. I choose to ignore him as I  struggle to
process everything.
    What the hell. Why is he even here?
    “So  what gives? It’s unlike both of you to not invite me somewhere.”
    My  mouth falls open at Noah’s boldness. I fight the urge to bolt from the
table and make a run for it,  deciding to deal with  the consequences of my
big mouth. How responsible of me.
    Noah’s  hand rests on my  chair, distracting  me from  the table, instead
choosing to concentrate on how warmth radiates from his body. He pretends
I didn’t  tell him  about this double date. I feel like this is an episode of The
Twilight Zone, the strange occurrences just part of the show.
    “We’re  on a  double date.” Liam  blushes while rubbing the back of  his
neck.
    “Oh,  a double date? Mind if I crash it for a second?” Noah doesn’t mean
to ask for permission, seeing as he commandeers the situation. He pulls up
an empty seat next to  Jax and me. I  have a feeling  he wants  to stay for
longer than a moment when he grabs my menu from my hands. My throat
bobs as his fingers brush against mine.
    I  pull away from his touch and rub my temple with my  hand, attempting
to prevent a tension headache. Could be a good excuse to get out  of this
situation.
    “Seeing  as you already are sitting,  does it even matter?” Liam  fails  to
hide his annoyance.
    My  head snaps up and catches his stormy blue eyes. Sophie covers up
her laugh with  her hand, the muffled  sound carrying  past her fingers. At

100
least one of us finds this amusing.
    “Is  Team McCoy  trying to  snag information from  our Bandini ladies?”
Noah rests  his elbows  on  the  table and  places his  chin  on  top  of  his
knuckles. He doesn’t pull off the innocent look well  with his wicked gleam
and smirk.
    I  speak up. “Because everything  goes back to racing  for  you. It’s  not
because they’re interested in hanging out with us outside of a track, right?
God forbid   that  were  to  happen.”  My  statement  silences the  table  as
everyone stares at me.
    Noah’s  lips gape before he clears his throat. “I  didn’t  mean that. I was
only joking around…” And  there goes another hand through his hair. I gloat
at his  embarrassment because he deserves it after crashing our date and
making dumb assumptions.
    “I  thought you would  be busy since you usually are on Wednesdays. Jax
was free and agreed to join. It’s nothing personal.” Liam returns to his usual
pacifist self.
    Everyone in the racing world  is well aware of Noah’s Wednesday ritual.
Those days usually include models, fine dining, and an exclusive tour of his
bedroom. Every tabloid knows it, and hell, I know it, no matter how much I
want to ignore it.
    “I   would’ve  canceled any  plans to  come. They’re  not  that important
anyway.”
    Wow. Way to  make any  of  the girls   you sleep with   feel special.  His
wicked Wednesday ritual leaves a bad taste in my mouth.
    Noah  cocks his  head to the  side when he  catches me scrunching my
nose.
    Jax and  Liam offer  him  blank looks.  They don’t  hide how  much they
want him to leave, but Noah steamrolls along, his presence authoritative.
    “Maya,  you’re from  Spain, right? Do you live  near Barcelona?” He acts
like we are the only ones at the table, going as far as to turn his back on Jax.
    “No,  I  live in  Asturias. It’s up north.”  I respond to the whole group, my
eyes pleading with Sophie’s, looking for an out. I’d  wave my white napkin
up in surrender if it meant escaping this situation.
    “How   is your  English so good then?”  Sophie finally  chimes in. That’s
my girl.
    I  bark out a laugh. “I  barely have an accent anymore because I went to
an American school.”

101
    “You  have a little accent. But it’s cute,” Noah says.
    My  cheeks warm at his comment. Cute? Since when has that word ever
left Noah Slade’s lips before? Sophie’s wide eyes meet mine.
    Jax and Liam  stare at Noah. Even Noah  looks surprised at what came
out of his mouth while another hand runs through his hair. Someone should
tell him about his noticeable tick because it gives him away.
    We  continue the  conversation like  Noah  didn’t   act extremely  out  of
character. I choose to overlook what he said, preferring my usual ignoring
techniques with anything related to Noah. If it makes my heart race and my
thighs clench, I pretend it never happened. Works like a charm. At least so
far during our  time at different  Prix stops, except we never find  ourselves
this close together.
    A  muscular  thigh brushes against mine  under the table,  his existence
made known as a hum of energy courses up my leg. His proximity muddles
my brain.  I push  my thighs  together, half to  avoid him,  half  to ease any
aches that happen whenever he gets near me.
    Every  day I convince myself  that I don’t  need someone like him in my
life—a guy  who breaks hearts as a side gig. I prefer to keep things simple
and avoid problems. Label it a sixth sense, or an in-depth Google search. I
still  regret that one because nothing good ever comes from  checking out
famous people online.
    We  carry on with  our  dinner. Noah orders something to  eat when our
appetizers come out. Jax and Liam give up on the double-date idea at this
point, filling  me with relief.
    Liam  covers the check at the end of the night.  I can only  imagine how
expensive this place  is,  even though I  ordered  something cheap on  the
menu. Hanging around guys who make more money in a year than I expect
to make in a lifetime makes me uncomfortable.
    Noah  unexpectedly wraps his arm around my  waist while  we wait  for
the driver to pick us up at the valet area. My body jolts at the contact of our
bodies pressing together. What has gotten into him today? The  moment I
think I  have him all figured  out, he does something like this, switching up
the game on me.
    “Maya   and I  can ride  back together  since we’re  staying at  the same
hotel.”  His   hand possessively  splays across  my  stomach,  holding  me
hostage. I like it  as much as I hate it. My  body tries to  wiggle away from
him, but I stop once my ass rubs against his front.

102
    I  choose to ignore the bulge I feel pressing against me.
    Nope. Not today, Satan. Stop tempting me.
    “What   a great idea.  Can I  tag along?  I’m  staying there  too.”  Sophie
shimmies on over to us, her green eyes humorously gazing at me.
    Noah’s arms squeeze me before he lets go. Sophie winks at me, and I’d
give her a hug if it didn’t draw attention to us.
    Liam  chuckles. “Trying  to run  away from  me? This doesn’t count as a
date, thanks to  Noah  and his  love  for  messing  shit  up. A   bet’s a  bet.
Unless…you want to back out? What did we say was the price for whoever
quits? I can’t remember. Maybe we can check your list.”
    Uh-oh.  Liam  doesn’t seem like  he will   let  Sophie off  easily. Jax and
Noah look confused at the mention of  a list,  but Sophie’s nostrils flare  as
she glosses over the information.
    “Mm   hmm, I don’t need money to keep me honest. I’m no quitter.” She
says a quick goodbye before walking toward the street.
    “Thanks  for dinner. We will  have to do  this another time.” I  give Liam
and Jax quick hugs.
    “Un-fucking-likely,”    Noah  says the word  low  enough for  only  me to
hear. I shake my head and walk away to join Sophie in the car.
    This night  did not go exactly how I thought it would.

103
12

104
                                                    Noah






I  spend  time  relaxing  on   Bandini’s  deck  after  a   successful qualifier.
Barcelona’s afternoon   sun  warms  my   skin  as  I   lounge  on   a  couch
overlooking the  ocean, blue waves rolling  against the  sandy coast while
birds fly above.
    It’s  purely coincidental when the Alatorre family shows up on the deck. I
take the  opportunity  to  watch  Maya  and Santiago  hang out  with   their
parents, curious to  see what their  dynamic  is  like  with  the  people who
raised them. Something heavy presses against my lungs at the idea of not
having a family supporting me at a race. Must be nice to share the weekend
with people you love.
    I  never  had that. My   dad usually  shows up for  the  Sunday race and
ditches after I place on the podium. He doesn’t care to join me at different
events,  forgoing    a   post-race   dinner   unless   he   wants    something.
Manipulative   motherfucker.  My   mother   equally   disappoints,  recently
contacting me to hook her up with  tickets for  her and her friends to  see a
Prix. The usual shit from them both.
    Maya’s mom  looks like an older version of her daughter, making it easy
to see where Maya gets her good looks from. Her dad rocks Bandini’s gear
and a permanent smile while  his  gray hair  peeks out  from  underneath a
scarlet cap. Their parents seem to be loving the F1 experience.
    I  find  it  difficult  to  ignore the pang of  jealousy swirling  around in my
chest, mixing  in  with  sadness and wistfulness—an unwelcome feeling  I
want to  push  away. Maya’s  family   seems simple yet  extremely  happy,
making it   hard to  overlook  how  I  grew  up  with  a  crappy  dad and  an
absentee mom. And  it  annoys me because I  never wanted for   anything
except  attention,  something   fundamental  yet   robbed  from   me.   The
Alatorres’ ordinariness and my shitty thoughts put me in a negative mental
space.
    My  scowl  lifts  to  a smile at the  sight of  Maya coming  up to  me. Her
brown  hair  bobs in   the usual  ponytail  I   love  to  pull,  held  up  with   a
scrunchie, along with ripped overalls and a white top. I don’t  miss the hint

105
of cleavage. The outfit   would  look ridiculous  on  anyone, except Maya’s
sensual enough to pull it off. A fucked-up nineties girl grinning at me.
    “Hey,  want to  come and meet my parents? They’ve asked about you a
few times, wanting to know who Santi has to compete against every week.”
She focuses on her feet, absentmindedly pushing around invisible dirt with
her sneaker.
    If  it puts a smile on your face…sure, why not.
    I  get up and introduce myself. Her mother pulls me in for a surprise hug,
showing me how touchy Spanish people are.
    “Maya  shares such nice things about you. It was kind of you to help her
with her videos.”
    Not  what I expected to come out of her mouth. Maya says good things? I
look over at the girl I  can’t get out of my  head lately. Her face turns red as
she stares at her sneakers again, making my small smile break out  into a
full-blown  grin.
    "It’s  no problem. I had fun helping her out.”
    “She’s  lucky to  have you around. Especially since she’s all alone when
Santi is busy. We tell him he works too hard.”
    I  doubt her mother would have the same opinions about me if she knew
half the thoughts I have about her daughter.
    Her  dad glares at me like he wants to assess me from the inside out. He
acts like  he can  read the expression on  my  face, his  scrutiny  and deep
brown eyes making me shift uncomfortably.
    “Take  care of my little  girl.”  Hidden meaning fills his statement. I don’t
try to get into his daughter’s pants, I just think about it  a lot. But I’ve  been
respectful compared to the way I act with girls I want to fuck. He should be
grateful.
    Call  me an entitled prick. Fuck if I care.
    “Santi’s  not  the one who needs help because he always was our good
kid. Maya, on the other hand—” her mother brushes a stray lock of hair out
of Maya’s face—“trouble. But  the good kind with such a big heart. She’s a
little  rebellious like her dad.”  Maya’s mom smiles up  at her husband with
love and affection.
    I  chuckle. “What is the good kind of trouble? I’m  curious how I can sell
that one to my PR team when I mess up again.”
    “She  always has good intentions, but they  sometimes miss their mark.
Overall she’s the best daughter anyone could ask for.” Maya’s mom gazes at

106
me with the warmth only a mother can have.
    “Mom,”   Maya groans. “Stop talking like I’m  not right here.” Her honey-
brown eyes look at me for the first  time in  a while. “Ignore  her. She loves
telling ridiculous stories.”
    “Do   you  know  she used to  steal Santi’s  kart  and ride  it  around the
neighborhood? She was only five years old. Santi exploded when she put a
couple of unicorn stickers on the steering wheel.”
    I  barely  contain a  laugh as Maya  rubs her  face, hiding  behind small
hands.
    “Ugh,  not a good moment. Santi was mad at me for weeks.” Maya’s lips
turn down.
    “You  liked karting?” I  pull on her ponytail to get her attention.
    Santi’s eyes narrow in on my hand while her dad scowls at me. Message
received.
    “I  did  it a few times on the side, but it was more Santi’s thing. I liked to
do whatever he did, including beating boys his age.” She smiles up at me.
Damn my chest tightens at her smile, proof of how much of  a sucker I am
for them lately.
    “How   about the time she tried to forge her middle-school report card?”
Santi fails to control his amusement.
    Maya’s cheeks turn into two bright red blobs.
    “Maya  Alatorre, did you live a life  hardened by crime?” I scoff.
    “Oh,  I  remember this one since her mother made me punish her  after.
Always got stuck disciplining.  She actually took her report  card out of the
mailbox  and tried  to  white-out   her bad  conduct  grade. She sealed the
envelope with a steamer before putting it back. If we hadn’t been so angry,
we would have been impressed. She cried when I took away her cell phone
for a week.” Her dad joins in on the fun.
    Maya looks everywhere but at me.
    “You  guys are literally  the worst. Santi, if  you keep it up, I’ll   tell Mom
and Dad about the time you drove their car at fourteen because you wanted
to go do donuts outside.”
    Oh, shit.  The looks on her parents’ faces tell me they don’t know about
this story. Maya’s statement shuts up Santiago quicker than I ever could.
    He puts his hands up in a mock surrender.
    “Truce.  No need to fight so dirty.”
    The idea of Maya fighting dirty  entices me.

107
    Fuck.
    I   banish   those  thoughts,  choosing  to   focus  on   having  a  normal
conversation with  my teammate’s parents. We all  end up  having a  good
time together until my dad shows up on the deck, sneaky like a snake with
enough venom to match. I am surprised he showed up earlier than race day,
a rarity  that makes me regret  skillfully   avoiding his  phone calls  for two
days.
    The  time we spend apart never seems long enough. Cold eyes land on
me, two blue  orbs as inviting  as skinny-dipping  in  the Arctic  Ocean. He
keeps his dark hair slicked  back and his suit  perfectly pressed with not  a
wrinkle   in   sight.   To   others  he   comes  off   as   welcoming,   but   his
deceptiveness covers up all the darkness simmering beneath his skin.
    Maya  eyes him curiously. My  dad ignores her family,  passing by them
without a glance. He comes to greet me, giving me a pat on the back, acting
happy to see me. Nicholas Slade couldn’t give less of a shit if he tried. But
since he cares about a show and his image, my life acts as a side project to
keep him busy from decaying during retirement.
    He watches Maya’s family suspiciously, paying attention to them for the
first time by assessing each of them. Competitors getting along is his worst
nightmare. And for a moment I  forgot Santiago and I are just  that, talking
with his family like  we don’t have a rivalry.
    It  felt nice. To be the three of us hanging out with their parents, the Prix
on the backburner while they got to know me. Parents who actually seemed
curious to ask me questions and learn about the man outside of a Bandini
car.
    “Son,   a second of   your  time?”  The  tick  in   my  dad’s jaw   tells  me
everything words won’t.
    “I’ll    see you  all  later  at  the event.”  I  throw   the statement over  my
shoulder as I follow my dad toward the suites.
    “You  ignored my calls. I fly  all the way out here for you and this is how
you treat me? I expect better from my son.”
    Right, we both know why he comes out to these events.
    I  bite  back a snarky comment. “I’ve   been busy qualifying  and getting
ready for tomorrow. It’s good that you found me between events.” Lies. But
I’ve learned from the biggest fraud of them all.
    “Yeah. We need to come up with a plan for tomorrow.”

108
    We  enter my private  room. My  dad settles into  one of  the couches, a
dark cloud against the white walls of the room as he sucks the energy from
me. He grabs one of the red pillows and props himself up against it.
    “How  are you going to go about winning the race?” He jumps into it.
    I  haven’t seen him in almost a year, and he doesn’t even ask how I am,
unsurprising, but still grating on my nerves.
    “By   racing the  best I  can?” I  meet with   strategists and engineers for
hours each week to prepare for a Prix. Don’t need his shitty two cents.
    “It’s   Santiago’s home  race. That  means it’s  a big  one  for  him.  You
should have seen his parade today. Thousands showed up.”
    “That’s  awesome for  him.  A  home Prix  is  usually  the best for  those
racers. I can’t  wait  for  the Austin  one, to  go back  to the  States and eat
Southern food.” My mouth waters at the idea of barbecue food.
    “Well,  you obviously need to wipe the floor with  him tomorrow. There’s
nothing worse than losing in your hometown,” my dad sneers.
    I  struggle to  hide my  irritation.  Racing  fuels a passion of  mine while
easing the edginess inside  of  me. Yeah,  it’s  a job,  but  it’s  much  more
because I enjoy it and compete against the best. My dad sucks the fun and
excitement out of anything, making everything a rivalry. No wonder he had
no friends back in his day.
    “Sure, Dad. I’ll  try  my best.”
    “You  better. I’m   here and the press will  eat that  shit up. They  love  a
good father-son moment.” He treats me like a shiny accessory.
    “I  need to get going. It’s a busy night before the race tomorrow.” I throw
him a wave before taking off.





Race day in Barcelona. The crowds bounce around in the stands, charged up
with excitement. Machines buzz, drills hum, and computers beep in the pit.
Sophie’s dad tests out the team radio in my ear to ensure we have an open
line of communication.
    I  zip up  my racing suit and put  on my flame-retardant headgear. I look
down at my helmet, savoring the  moment of representing Bandini’s brand
and appeasing my fans. This life is all I  know, and it brings me comfort to
put on my helmet. Honey, I’m home.

109
    Crew  members push my  car toward  my grid  location.  Liam  has pole
position, while I’m second, and Santiago’s third.
    Before  a  race,  I  spend hours  studying  the  track,  making  sure  I’ve
memorized all of the turns. A total of sixty-six laps made up of sixteen turns
stand between me and the Spanish Grand Prix’s podium.
    The race kicks off with  a bang. An American team driver crashes his car
into the barrier  on the first  turn, taking  down two  other drivers with  him.
What a shitshow as metal flies around and cars run into one another.
    Liam  holds first place for the first few laps. We play a game between the
two of us, me trying to  pull up to his side and him being aggressive on the
turns. Sweat trickles down my neck as my skin warms from the heat of the
engine. I take a couple sips of my drink to stay hydrated because nothing is
worse than getting woozy as I drive around at top speeds.
    I  narrowly  avoid  clipping  Liam’s  tire  at one of  the  sharper turns. He
pulls away  from  the curve,  flashing me  a glove-clad  middle  finger.  His
rattled state makes me chuckle.  The car continues hauling  ass down the
racetrack as I hit  a main straight.  An  opportunity for  overtaking presents
itself when Liam lets down his defenses for a split second. I pass him at one
of the turns. My foot presses on the accelerator, allowing my car to pick up
speed and race down the straights, leaving Liam in my rearview mirror. Too
bad, so sad.
    Fans wave their Spanish flags and big face cutouts of Santiago in the air.
They blur past me as I continue down the track.
    Negative thoughts fill   my head about the crap my dad said yesterday. I
don’t want  to be a teammate who  steps on others, trying to  one-up them
every time, acting like my father. No one likes a piece of shit. The type who
takes everything, not caring how  it affects the  other person. Santi’s had a
rough go starting out this season. His rashness fucks me up, but he wants to
win as much as anyone else.
    Losing   in   Austin   would  suck.   How  disappointing—all   those  fans
showing up, hoping you represent them well but falling short.
    Fuck me, I hate thinking while racing.
    After  a pit  stop, I make my  way back up the race ranks from  fourth to
first again. I hold onto my first-place spot for another twenty-six laps.
    “Noah,  Santiago’s gaining speed behind you. He’s in  second now. For
the love of God, don’t crash into each other at a turn.” My  radio relays the
team principal’s message.

110
    “Copy.  What happened to Liam?” I growl  at his words because I’m not
crashing into anyone today.
    “Don’t   worry   about that  now. Santiago is  behind  you  by  about five
seconds. Be careful not to let him overtake you.”
    “Got  it, thanks.”
    My  defensive position  at the head of  the pack takes minimal  effort  to
keep. Blurring  crowds welcome  me as I  pass the starting  point  again, a
wave of red  and gold colors flying   by me, matching the  Spanish flag the
Alatorres had earlier. Their cheers get louder as Santiago passes them while
he closes the gap behind me. A few seconds away from me now. If I were
Santiago, I would do anything to win this race.
    He tails me the whole time, waiting for me to slip up.
    The  image of  Maya  and  her family   coming all  this  way  to  see him
succeed flies through my mind. Shit. I try to push away the thoughts, but the
invasive images don’t let up, accompanied by sounds of Maya’s laughs and
cheers. My hands grip the steering wheel as I think about the sacrifices his
parents made for his  career. Sacrifices Maya made living  in  his  shadow.
Never being one to  steal the spotlight,  preferring  to dance around in  the
dark while her brother  gets all the attention. Unfortunately  for her, people
like me thrive in the shadows.
    Fuck.  I never think this  much during a race, like ever, because thinking
makes me stupid. Thinking leads me to come up with my rash, selfless plan
in the first place.
    A  fucking anomaly.
    On the sixtieth  lap, I let down my defenses more. I do it slowly, making
sloppier turns, allowing more space for anyone to overtake me, while I still
stay in  control of  my  car. Messing  up too  quickly  would  draw negative
attention to myself.
    “Noah,  is  everything all  right?  Santiago’s gaining speed. He wants to
overtake you. Make your turns tighter.”
    “Copy.  I think  something’s off with  the car, but I can’t figure  it out. Do
you see anything  on the  screens?” I  sure as shit  know  there is  nothing
wrong, but I  have to milk   it to  the point  where I believe  my own  words.
Fans can tune into my team radio via live television.
    “Nothing  over here. Can you describe what’s happening? We can figure
it out for you.” My  engineer sounds hopeful.

111
    “Not  really.  I think  there’s something wrong with the steering wheel. It
feels loose.” The lie leaves my lips easily as I make another bad turn.
    “Got  it. Just keep going and we’ll figure it out later.” They all  buy it, my
authentic display working  on the team. I still  want  to land on the  podium
anyway.
    By  lap  sixty-four,  I  make  worse turns that  leave myself  open for  an
overtaking. To no one’s surprise, Santiago passes me at one of the corners,
rattling my car as he zooms by.
    My  lips lift  at the corners.
    The  crowd goes wild,  releasing deafening roars when Santiago crosses
the finish  line first,  red smoke billowing   up into  the air  from canisters. I
solidify my second place on the podium when I get the next checkered flag.
    Better luck next time.





Santiago’s family celebrates behind the barrier next to the podiums as they
watch us on the stage. His parents light up the entire stage with their smiles
alone. Maya has decked herself out  in Bandini  gear, with  a Spanish flag
wrapped around her as she dances around to the music streaming from the
stage speakers. Watching her happy makes my heart clench like a chick.
    Usually, when I  meet a woman, the first thing that attracts me is a set of
perky tits, a tight  ass, and seductive lips. But for  the first time  in my  life,
I’m  interested in  someone for  a  different  reason. With  Maya,  the most
beautiful thing about her is how her eyes light up with happiness when she
grins, an infectious smile that makes my lips turn up every time. Her beam
is hands down  one of  my  favorite  things.  A  bubble  of  positive energy,
dancing in circles without a care in the world.
    Does she have a great body? Sure.
    But  at this moment, her smile draws me to her. I want to keep them all to
myself and bottle  them up for  the bad days. Don’t  get me  started on her
laughs. I feel them all the way down to my cock, every single time.
    Champagne  sprays all   around  me,  but  I  barely   pay  attention,  too
enamored by her.
    And fuck, it scares me.

112
    I  smirk one last time at the sight of her before turning back to the rest of
the crowd. They chant my name, and although it  feels great to hear them,
nothing beats the smile on Maya’s face as she watches us.
    My  dad paces the motorhome’s lobby after the winners’  ceremony. He
follows me to the private suite area, his agitation evident in his jerky steps.
The sounds of our shoes against the smooth floor  distract me. I  pull  him
away from others because we don’t need an audience for his explosion. He
enters the suite first, and before I have a chance to close the door, he shoves
me toward the center of the room. His dirty move catches me off guard. My
feet trip on the slick tile, but I right myself before hitting a couch.
    So this is how today is going to go.
    “What  the fuck,  Noah? You call that racing?”  His voice  echoes off the
walls. Someone’s cranky about my second-place win.
    “Last  time I  checked we called it  racing. But maybe the concepts have
changed since you last drove. It’s been a while.”
    My  dad’s chest heaves up and down as his eyes dart around, wild  and
uncontrolled. It’s the same look he gave me every time I failed to land on a
shitty kart  podium or  crashed my F2 car. A  glare he saved for  our alone
time in his office before he smacked my ass into the next day. Lucky for us
bruises aren’t visible when you wear race suits daily. Not a single scar was
left on my  skin except for the mangled remains of my  heart, a mistrusting
organ ruined by the man before me. A cliché of the worst kind.
    “I  don’t  sponsor this team to see a shitty performance like that from my
own son. I don’t  buy your crap with  the steering wheel. All the tests came
back fine;  nothing seemed loose.” His  voice  gets louder as his  agitation
grows. My face remains flat because I don’t feed into his anger. The fallout
from his rage is a lesson I don’t wish to revisit anytime soon, at least not in
this lifetime.
    I  look  over his shoulder and catch the suite door ajar, a shocked Maya
staring back  at me  through the  crack with   a hand  covering her  mouth.
Acting like Spanish Nancy Drew piecing together what I did.
    Just a bad day in racing. Steering wheel problems happen all the time.
    “There  was something off. Hopefully they find  out what happens before
the next race, that way I can get first place next time.”
    “Bullshit!   Don’t  try  to pull  something over on  me, acting all  coy. You
know I  basically fund your  career here. People would kill  for  your seat. I
could replace you like that.” He snaps his fingers.

113
    “Go  ahead. I’m sure McCoy  would offer  me a seat in a heartbeat. That
team probably pays more  than Bandini  does anyway. Wouldn’t  you  like
that?”
    A  resounding crack fills  the small  room as my  head snaps to the side.
My  dad fucking  backhanded me. I try  my  hardest not to start something
with him,  my breaths becoming labored as my self-control teeters. Maya’s
gasp and the whooshing sound in my ears make it difficult to make out any
other noises.
    I  wipe away blood trickling  down  my mouth. It  feels like I’m  ten years
old again, getting third  place in a kart  race, my dad pissed and taking his
anger out on me. Looks like old tricks never die.
    “Oh  Father, I thought we were past this. You should put  more meaning
behind a hit like that; maybe age is getting to you.”
    “I   thought we were moving  on from  your shitty  attitude, but I  guess I
was wrong. Fix yourself up. You look like a fucking mess.”
    Thank fuck  Maya has the foresight to disappear because my dad barrels
through, ending  our  crappy  conversation.  I  take  a  deep breath  before
looking into  the hall, surprised yet relieved  to find  it empty, a nosy Maya
long gone.

114
13

115
                                                    Maya






Holy shit.
    Holy  fucking shit.
    I  can’t get the image out of my  head of Noah’s dad hitting him because
how does someone hit their thirty-year-old child?
    My   brain  runs a  million  miles  an  hour, unable  to keep  up  with  the
surplus of  information.  The  steering wheel  problems,  the race,  his dad
freaking hitting him across the face. The way Noah’s eyes looked into mine,
sad and so damn lost. It gutted me to  see him like that.  Stripped down to
nothing more than  a man with  weaknesses and a fractured past. Nothing
like the cocky  man I  see daily, unaffected and disinterested in the people
around him.
    My  family  shows up in Santi’s suite five minutes after the Slades’ fight.
No one notices my  silence or how  my leg  bounces up and down while  I
mull over what I saw: a family dynamic no one knows about. I took an Intro
to Psych course, and I know the stats about parents hitting their kids. This is
not a one-time thing,  a fluke  because of a messed-up steering wheel or a
lost race.
    Noah’s dad is a messed-up man who lives through his son.
    I  spend time with my  family  before excusing myself. Santi looks at me
weirdly  before  returning his  attention  to  my  parents, their  wide  smiles
bright after his success today.
    I  go to  the kitchen and grab an ice  pack, the cold plastic numbing  my
hand as I walk up to Noah’s suite. My stomach rolls from nerves because I
don’t want to  overstep after his bad day. Another deep breath expands my
lungs. I wait for a moment, unsure if I should knock on his door.
    I  dig deep and lightly rap my knuckles.
    The  door opens a crack. A  moody Noah looks  down at me,  blue eyes
shadowed by a  Bandini  hat situated low  on  his  face, a  poor attempt  at
hiding his reddened skin.
    “Hey,  I  come bearing gifts.”   I jiggle  the  ice pack. No  point in  hiding
what I saw earlier.

116
    Noah  pushes his door open wide, and I pass through. His suite has the
same layout as Santi’s with plain white walls and red accents with Bandini's
logo covering  one  wall.  He  takes a  seat on one  of  the  white  couches,
grabbing the extended ice pack while I take up a spot on the opposite side.
    “Come  to admit you suck at eavesdropping?”
    My   cheeks  flush  at  his   tactlessness. “Well,  sorry.”   Might   as well
apologize even though they left the door open.
    “And  sorry you saw that. I should have closed the door, but he surprised
me for the first time in a while.” Noah’s words tug at me.
    His   statement is  a  lot   to  unpack,  and  I  don’t   understand why  he
apologizes. My  head  pounds as I   wrap  my  mind  around Noah’s  toxic
history with his dad.
    “You  don’t  need to be sorry. He’s  a total ass. You warned me a while
ago, but I guess I didn’t think it was that bad.”
    Noah  winces  as he  presses the ice  pack  against his  face.  “No  one
knows.” He lets out a deep and shaky sigh. My stomach dips with unease at
his lowered defenses, a rare sighting  for  someone as confident and self-
assured as him.
    “I’m   going to go out  on a limb here and assume this isn’t the first time
he’s hit you.”
    Noah’s blank gaze reveals enough.
    “How  long has he been doing this? That’s not right. It’s not how parents
should be, especially at your age. You could kick his ass into next week.”
    “A  while,  but I’d rather no one finds out, so let’s keep it between us.”
    My   heart cracks  at his  admission. I   can’t  imagine growing   up with
someone rude,  condescending, and  disgustingly   competitive.   Hard  to
picture what Noah’s life was like. He puts on an image for others, but is this
what he deals with once the Prix lights shut off?
    Santi  and I  don’t  share his  same problems because our parents have
always treated us with respect and love. Growing up without wealth  could
be a better option.  I live  a happy  life,  and no one holds money  over my
head. Not Santi, who pays for a lot  of things. Even though  I make money
from YouTube ads and sponsorships, the funds don’t have the same weight
as an F1 contract.
    “I  won’t  tell anyone. But I don’t  understand why you cover up for him.”
A wave  of  nausea hits me as I consider how  people act around his  dad,
idolizing him  as a racing legend. Fans call Noah the American Prince. One

117
stuck wearing a crown heavy from deceit and expectations. No matter how
much Noah dislikes his dad, he lives in his legacy.
    “Who  would  believe me? He’s a racing icon and a big  sponsor for this
team. People see what they want to see anyway.” His head faces up to the
ceiling. Liquid  from the ice pack drips onto his race suit, running down the
red fabric like tears. How symbolic.
    “I   don’t  know.  Anyone.  There’s always  someone filming  something.
Cameras catch everything nowadays.”
    I  recognize how I  saw Noah how I  wanted, believing the show he puts
on for everyone. Smug, overconfident, rebellious. My chest tightens at my
quick judgment.
    “Please leave it alone.” His voice has a sense of finality to it. I  drop that
part of the conversation because I don’t want to push him too far  when he
opens up to me.
    I  choose to address the second issue because I can’t help myself. “Is it
true what he said? About your steering wheel?”
    He lets out another deep sigh. “Don’t trust everything you  hear. My dad
gets pissy when I don’t place first. My  steering wheel was loose, no matter
what people say.” Words leave through gritted teeth.
    “But   you  were in  the  lead for  like  forty  laps.  Defensiveness is your
thing.”
    “Maya.”   His gravelly  voice captures my attention, making  me look  up
into his intense blue eyes. My name rolls  off his  tongue, hitting me in  the
heart and below the belt at once. “Drop it. Forget what he said. Your brother
won the Spanish Grand Prix fair and square. You should be happy for him
instead of thinking up conspiracy theories.”
    His  eyes dart to the side as he avoids my gaze for a second too long.
    Holy  shit. Noah totally threw the race. Why would he lose?
    We  sit   together  in  silence.  I   attempt  to  work   through  these  new
revelations, getting lost in my own world,  not noticing how  he gets up and
sits next to me.
    He clasps my hand in his, ice pack long forgotten. My pulse quickens at
the contact. I tell  myself it  must be because his hand is freezing from the
ice,  the  cool  touch  jolting   my   body.  It   has nothing   to  do  with   our
connection. Right?
    I   try  to  pull  my  hand  away, but  he  holds on,  his  calloused fingers
brushing against mine. My skin tingles where his thumb lazily rubs against

118
my hand.
    “Listen.  Let’s  forget what  my dad said. No  need to give attention to  a
piece of shit  who  gets mad when I  don’t  place first.  He’s  irrelevant and
barely shows up  anymore, that is  unless it’s  convenient for  him  and his
bank account.”
    “Uh,  yeah. Sure.” I  barely pay attention to  what he says. My eyes stay
pinned on his tan hand engulfing  my small one, his thick  thumb brushing
against my bony knuckle in a mindless pattern.
    The room warms as tension thickens, choking me as it wraps around my
head and my heart. His silent confession about the race feels like too much
between us. I don’t want to share secrets together, opening myself up even
more to him, a point we can’t turn back from.
    But  he doesn’t need to  admit anything  to me. He  threw his  chance at
winning today, from a quick gaze and a bob of his Adam’s apple. Label it a
sixth sense for bullshit.
    Relief  fills   me when  his hand stops caressing mine.  I  finally  breathe
easier, gaining the mental clarity to tug my hand away.
    “I  better get going. I’m  going to dinner with  my family  before the after-
party. Maybe we will see you there.”
    I  lean over  him and give  him  a kiss on  his non-red cheek. His  breath
catches at the touch while my lips tingle  at the contact, lingering a second
too long.
    I  bounce out  of my  seat and reach for  the door  handle before he can
react.
    He  remains sitting on the couch, unphased, except for a tiny  lift  at the
corner of his mouth. If I  didn’t  know him then I  would have missed it. But
we’ve spent two months together, and I’ve been learning his ticks, the tells
he gives when no one watches him.
    “See you later. Thanks…for coming over. And the ice pack.” He repeats
the same jiggle I did earlier. I laugh at his ridiculousness, blue eyes lighting
up when they land on me.
    “No  problem.”  I don’t  bother looking over  my shoulder as I softly  shut
the door.
    Noah doesn’t show up to the main after-party. I hate to admit it feels off
without him there, missing how he entertains me while Santi and Sophie are
busy.

119
    During  the party, it hits me how much trouble I’m  in. A cardinal sin has
been broken.
    I  think I like Noah Slade.

120
14

121
                                                    Maya






Monaco. The ultimate racing Prix to attend. Bandini’s week is packed with
events before the world-famous Monaco Grand Prix, known  as one of the
oldest races in F1 history, fueled by wealth and luxury. Celebrities from all
over the world  come to  attend. Yachts litter  the sea, glittering  under  the
bright sun as I observe from our hotel room.
    The  Bandini team schedules a week packed with boat trips, interviews,
galas—you name it,   they  have it.   Which  means I  get  to  go,  too.  My
supportive sister role has no  bounds, and although I  usually try  to  avoid
these types of events, I don’t complain about this race week.
    Because not even I can resist a party with one of the Kardashians.
    Monte Carlo is the coolest place ever. Pictures don’t do it justice; they’re
unable to  capture the  picturesque shoreline  and old-world   feel.  I  can’t
believe Santi wants to buy an apartment here. We picked one out earlier in
the week  before  he  got  busy, a  modern two-bedroom  overlooking   the
Mediterranean Sea.
    I  can tell the stress is getting to him. He seems edgier than usual, getting
heated at smaller things, like when I left my makeup all over the bathroom
counter. Monaco’s race is a big deal and he feels pressure from Bandini to
perform well. It doesn’t help that this Prix happens to be one of Noah’s best,
a place where his racing skills shine.
    What exactly am I doing on a Tuesday in Monaco?
    I’m  on a boat.
    Bragging  isn’t something I usually  do. But come on. This is  Monaco…
By boat, I mean one that is at least a hundred feet long, the white fiberglass
gleaming under  the hot  summer  day. But  I  don’t  ask  the  owner about
footage because that’s rude and not high class.
    And  I want to be posh and proper this week.
    My   body lies  on a  lounge chair on  the front  deck of  the  McFloating
Mansion. I already toured the four different  floors, drank a cocktail  on the
back deck, and did a vlog interview with my  brother while breathing in the
crisp ocean breeze. Talk about living my best life this week.

122
    I  grab  a sunscreen bottle out of  my bag  because my skin is  warming
under the intense sun. Noah, a man with impeccable timing, decides to plant
himself in a lounge chair next to me.
    “Avoiding    the sun?”  He  taps  at  the pink   bottle  in  my  hand.  Dark
sunglasses make it difficult to see and read the emotions swirling within his
blue irises. To be honest, his whole look unsettles me. His preppy bathing
suit looks shorter than  regular swim trunks,  accentuating muscular thighs
and calves. Plus, he’s lost his shirt  somewhere between the cocktail hour
and now. My eyes flick across his tan, sculpted body before focusing on the
deck.
    “No   tan is worth  aging when I’m   already naturally golden.”  My  heart
quickens when he leans in closer.
    His  hand brushes against mine, causing an intense buzz of energy, one
that never goes away no matter how many times his skin touches mine. He
grabs the sunscreen bottle right out of my hand.
    “Uh.  I can handle that!” I sound breathy. Can he tell?
    His  cocky grin  tells me that yes, he can. I grab my sunglasses from the
top of my head and pull them down onto my face, creating a barrier because
two can play this game. An immature move I have no problem with.
    “Turn  around. I’ll  help you.”
    Is it  possible to die of a heart attack at twenty-three? What are the stats?
    I  pull out my cellphone, desperate to check.
    “What  on  earth are you so  interested in now? Every  time  I’m  around
you, you’re always doing something fidgety.”
    I  want  to disappear in the  lounge cushions or melt  away into  the sea.
He’s onto me.
    He plucks my phone straight out of my hands.
    “Excuse me! Hand it  back. Now.” I  use my best mom voice, but it lacks
the desired effect I want,  making Noah chuckle instead. Going  to suck at
punishing my kids one day.
    He ignores me, choosing to swat away my grabby hands.
    “What   are  the chances of  dying  of   a heart  attack  at  twenty-three?
Seriously, you’re googling this? I didn’t  know I  had such an effect on you.
You flatter me.”
    I  shoot him my  best scowl, but he just laughs. A  full  throw-your-head-
back laugh, and if I weren’t peeved, I’d find it extremely attractive. Who am

123
I kidding? I do. Annoyed or not, this man is fine. Handsome and absolutely
fuckable.
    I  take advantage of his moment of weakness and snatch my phone back.
    He rotates his finger in a motion to  get things moving here, his previous
task no longer put off. I  reluctantly turn  and lie down stomach first on  the
reclined lounge chair. Noah sits by my side, the cushion dipping under his
weight as his thigh presses against my body.
    He  toys with  my red bikini   strap before squirting the sunscreen bottle.
“You look good in red.”
    Does his voice sound huskier? Is it just me? I can’t see his face since I’m
looking out at the Mediterranean Sea.
    My   body  jerks  when the  cold  liquid  hits  my  back.  I  lie  to  myself,
chalking up my  goosebumps to the cold sunscreen. Not because of Noah
rubbing sunscreen all over my back. Nope.
    I  tell myself so many lies about Noah that I convince myself to go to the
local confessional. A  priest will   have a field  day  with  this type  of stuff,
offering sage advice before sending me off with at least five Hail  Marys. I
can’t blame myself.  Noah has the  sex appeal of about one  hundred men
combined, making this whole process hard.
    My  arms grow  heavy as he continues to rub  lotion  into my  back; I’m
enjoying the feeling of  being cared for while  Noah’s hands caress me. His
strokes leave a path of warmth behind them. I let out an embarrassing moan
that I try to cover up with a cough.
    His  laugh—all throaty and deep—makes my body sing. He acts like this
is natural, just the two  of us hanging out  on our private yacht,  enjoying a
casual day on the water. We might as well be because not one person passes
by to save me.
    He   can’t  see my   face,  thankfully,   because my  cheeks sear  at  his
unrelenting touch.
    And  that’s not the only thing heating up.
    My  core  pulses at the attention from  him. How  long has it  been since
I’ve slept with a guy? Maybe my junior year of college? My brain draws up
a blank, which I don’t find to be a good sign. I decide this must be my issue
with him. Not because he knocks off every attractive thing on my checklist.
    Sure.
    His  hands move to the dip in my  lower back and I groan as they knead
my skin.

124
    I’m  so very fucked.
    My  body hums with excitement at Noah’s touch, not understanding why
this is all so very, very wrong.
    He pulls me out of my thoughts.
    “Did  I  tell you that you look beautiful today?”
    Nope, you didn’t. But  I’ll  take it  now, with my  head pressed against the
comfy lounge chair as his hands rub my back. I don’t think he has a drop of
sunscreen left on his fingers.
    “Hmm.  Not sure.”
    Okay, good job. That didn’t sound half as desperate as your moan.
    “You  look stunning today.” He ramps up his charm.
    He  shocks me by doing  the unthinkable. I  suck in  a breath as his lips
press against the curve of my neck. Swoon. It takes everything in me to not
bolt from  the chair. My  fingernails  claw  into the seat fabric  to hold  still,
leaving indentations to match the ones Noah burns into my brain.
    My  body feels on fire and my most intimate places are worse off. How is
it possible to  get turned  on by  sunscreen application? There should be a
warning label on the back of the bottle  for this. Screw damaging rays, this
shit with Noah burns me up worse than any SPF below fifty.
    He  lets out  another chuckle that  prompts me to  turn around and  face
him.
    He  looks  unaffected, and it  ticks  me off.  I  check for  signs.  His eyes
remain hidden, and his face looks neutral. My eyes surpass his golden chest
and abs because I have absolutely no time or restraint for that.
    I  smirk at the bulge in his bathing suit. His  cheeky grin makes me want
to kiss it off his face, replacing the humor in his eyes with lust.
    Our  attraction threatens our semblance of  normalcy with  one another.
Not sure what to make of this. I need time to process, concoct an avoidance
plan, set up defenses against the ultimate playboy. This will  take  effort. I
may even need Sophie’s help  with  reinforcements because plans are her
thing; she’s been successfully avoiding her attraction to Liam like a plague.
    Thou  shall not  bang your brother’s  teammate rings in my  ears, a new
mantra for  me by  now. Yes,  my mantra  list  continues to  grow, but  you
haven’t met Noah Slade. You don’t understand how sensuality seeps from
his  pores. Never  underestimate the  power  of  pheromones and  wicked
smiles.
    He even makes sunscreen application into some kind of foreplay.

125
    Guilt  rushes through me because I don’t  want to be attracted to Noah.
Although he does nice things for me, he stills acts like a dick to Santi. I’m a
walking contradiction at the moment, battling  the pros and cons, weighing
catastrophic situations if Noah and I got together.
    Noah gets up from my chair, placing the offensive sunscreen bottle next
to me. A wave of uncertainty passes through me. Part of me wants to make
him stay while  the other  part of  me wants him  to go. My  brain  needs to
digest  this  information.   His  boner  distracts  me   enough, drawing   my
attention to it, the bulge looking much larger as he stands. I need it removed
from my vicinity  ASAP.
    He tugs on my ponytail. I  smile up at him because somehow it’s become
our thing.
    How can he be so hot yet so cute at the same time? Troubling.
    “Don’t   think too hard. You’ll  be stuck battling the ‘what if you  dos’ and
the ‘what  if  you don’ts’  instead of  living  in  the moment. Call  me if  you
need my help  again. I’ll   be around.”  He  gives me one  last cocky  smile
before disappearing below the deck.
    I  let out a deep sigh.
    I’m  so royally screwed, by the F1’s American Prince no less.





I can lie  and pretend I’m  a mature woman. I  can say I’ve  kept it  cool  in
front of Noah and my brother. But I haven’t. Why bother lying when I  suck
at it anyway?
    My  butt plants itself on the bench inside of a local priest’s confessional.
My  mother loves how I’ve   found time to  go to  church while  in Monaco.
The priest wishes me lots of luck  with  my life  and tells me to go to  Mass
more. It feels good to let it all out, even to a man of the cloth, like  my own
therapist on the road. I’d describe the experience as cathartic. No shame as I
spill my guts to him, letting it all out in a confessional booth.
    Surprisingly,  he sends me off with  three Hail  Marys, two  Our Fathers,
and a  bottle  of  holy  water  to  cleanse myself  whenever I  have  impure
thoughts. Confessions come with goody bags—who knew?
    I  start  a new  Avoiding  Noah campaign. It   goes strong for  two  days,
thanks to Sophie’s obsession with lists and plans.

126
    Two  long  days. If  anyone understood the amount of  effort  it  takes to
avoid  him,  they  would  be  impressed. He  and  my  brother  have to  do
everything together in Monaco since a united team looks great to the public.
    I   spend a lot  of   me-time in  our  Monaco  hotel  avoiding  parties and
cocktail hours. To pass the time, I book myself a massage. It doesn’t yield
the same physical reaction as Noah’s back rub, but I attribute it to having a
woman massage therapist. She doesn’t physically do it for me. Santi covers
the cost, but unbeknownst to  him,  he basically rewards me  for my  good
efforts of avoiding Noah. I take one for the team here.
    I  would  count  my evading  techniques as successful, at least until my
brother asks if I can attend a fashion show that apparently is a big deal. An
A-list event I should be grateful to have an invite to.
    Santi  makes me watch him  practice his runway  walk to  make sure he
looks good. He loves the limelight, but not this  kind—with  the expectation
to model. And I  do not blame him at all.  If  I did  a show like this, I  would
definitely fall  flat on my face before rolling into the pool.
    “Do   you really  need me there?” Please say no. I  can only  execute so
much control around Noah. And once you add a tux element into the mix,
it’s a recipe for disaster.
    I  feel like my brother sets me up for failure here.
    “I  never thought I’d  have to convince you to go to this. Everyone wants
a ticket.” He pouts at me, a bit  extra for his standards. It impresses me yet
flusters me all  the same because he uses my own strategies to get me to
agree.
    I  can’t get out of this when his words sound absolute. So I engage in the
next step of a desperate woman’s plan.
    I  bargain.
    “Can  Sophie come—if  she doesn’t  have an invite  already—because I
don’t want to be alone during it.” I  don’t trust myself, I mentally add before
putting my two hands together in a silent plea.
    He  texts away on his  phone, searching for the answer to my  question,
unable to resist my charm.
    “All   right, I  got her a ticket too. But  you both have to behave because I
won’t be out there protecting you from the old men.”
    “But   I’ve  always wanted a sugar daddy!”  I  whine while  throwing  my
hands up in the air.

127
    He  throws a pillow  at my face. Santi may have won this  battle, but I’ll
win the war.

128
15

129
                                                    Maya






“I  can’t believe you scored us tickets for  the fashion show. It’s one of  the
biggest events of the year.”  Sophie bounces up and down in  a chair.  We
went on a shopping spree earlier to buy dresses for the event because she
claimed what we had wasn’t enough.
    “Oh,   believe it.  We  better finish   getting ready.  The car’s  coming  in
twenty.” I don’t feel guilty  about using Sophie as a cockblocker because her
enjoyment rubs off on me.
    Two birds, please meet my one stone.
    I  run a hand down the silky material of my blue dress. Looking at it now,
I realize the blue matches the color of Noah’s eyes.
    Fuck me. A fashion equivalent of a Freudian slip.
    I  grab my  heels and book it out  of the hotel  room, wanting  to get this
night over with.
    Sophie  can’t   stop  chattering  the  whole  car  ride  to   the  oceanfront
destination. “Did you know all the guys will be modeling tonight?”
    Can’t say I did.
    “Are    you  excited   for  anyone  in   particular?”   I   want  to   pull   any
information about her thing with Liam. Sophie hides her attraction well, but
I catch the briefest glances she gives him. She tells me they’re “just friends”
ever since she pulled that card on him after our fail of a double date.
    “Mm,   no.  Such an odd  question. Are  you?”  She stares at me.  Point
taken.
    We arrive  at the fashion show location soon after. A cross-shaped stage
floats in the center of a pool, lit  from  within  and emitting a purplish glow.
We make out different yachts anchored out in the ocean. The event bustles
with enjoyment from the attendees while waiters walk around with food and
drinks. Music streams from speakers around us.
    “Let’s   get  a drink.  Time  to  get  this  party started.”  Sophie pulls  me
toward the bar area.
    She handles ordering. “Can we have four shots of your finest tequila?”
    My   eyebrows  rise. Two  shots  already? “I   don’t   want  to  end  up  a
blubbering drunk mess tonight. Tequila makes me embarrassing.” Hard to

130
forget how  I  cried  in  a bathroom. I  blame  the Jonas Brothers and their
fourth band member, José.
    “Relax.”  She pats my arm for good measure. “We can get buzzed now so
we can enjoy the show. We won’t have more until the alcohol wears off.”
    She slides the two glasses toward me and we knock back the shots.





Sophie was right. This fashion show is way  better with a buzz. Guys strut
their stuff down the stage, each looking handsome in their different evening
wear. I even whistle when Noah comes out. Not my fault  he looks beyond
fuckable in his tux, which calls out to me.
    Whoops. This is the alcohol talking.  A slip  of the tongue. I do not want
to fuck Noah Slade. I nudge Sophie when Liam comes out, his body pressed
against the tailor-made suit and his  blonde hair  slicked back in  his usual
style. He even points her out of the crowd and sends her a wink. That one is
a flirt, and honestly, I have no idea how Sophie resists him because her eyes
light up whenever she sees him.
    Once the show finishes, Sophie and I get the party started. Sophie bribes
the DJ to let us behind his setup. She spins the turntables while I pick  out
songs from a playlist. We get a few people to bounce up and down, creating
a small mosh pit at the center of the dance floor. I don’t think I’ve  laughed
any harder than I have with her.
    A  Bandini  rep eventually pulls us away from  the DJ area after we play
our  third  reggaeton song.  Apparently,  it’s  not  well-suited  for   the elite
crowd.
    Two  older guys ask us to dance and we agree. Not exactly my type but
the haze of alcohol says yes for me as they pull us toward the dance floor.
Sophie and I aren’t drunk. Only  a little on  the tipsy side, still  managing to
stay put together.
    A  crowd of  dancing couples engulfs us. I dance around with a middle-
aged man who has gelled-back hair and smells strongly of alcohol. My eyes
search for Sophie  between songs, but I   can’t find   her. The man’s  hand
creeps its way toward my ass at the same moment I conveniently step on his
toes. Hard. He lets out a yelp while I fake an apology.

131
    Music  shifts to a classic salsa song DJs play at our clubs back home. A
shadow looms over my dance partner. By now, I can recognize the reason
for the tingle in my spine anywhere. Two months of resisting him does that.
Strobe lights  basking him  in  an ominous  glow, my  naughty  knight  in a
shining tux sizes up my pervy dance partner.
    “Mind   if I cut in?”  Noah’s irritated voice carries over the music. Or am I
hearing things? Alcohol confuses my brain.
    The  man sputters out a  reply  as he lets me  go. Noah grabs my  hand
while placing another at the dip in my back right above my ass. It feels way
less invasive than my previous dance partner, like his hand should be there.
Plus, Noah doesn’t smell like whiskey and old money. He needs to bottle up
his scent and sell it on the mass market. I would buy a few bottles and spray
it on my pillows at night, not creepily of course.
    I  smile at the idea. Real mature, Maya.
    He  shakes his head like  he can’t  believe the sorry  state I’m  in  at the
moment. He and I both.
    I  place a hand on his shoulder. His tux feels smooth under my fingertips,
the strained material pressing against his muscles.
    “I   thought you were avoiding me because I haven’t seen you at any of
the events this week.”
    I  think out my reply carefully. Well, as carefully as alcohol allows me to.
    “Where  did  you learn to dance salsa?” Suave change of subject if I do
say so myself.
    His  deep laugh makes me feel all warm inside.
    “I   lived  in Europe long  enough to pick  up on  it.”  He sways us to  the
music.
    A  kernel  of jealousy blossoms at the idea of  Noah dancing with  other
girls.
    “Hmm.  Cool.”  I feign indifference, but I can’t tell if  I succeeded.
    Noah turns me, pulling  my back to his front.  My ass presses against his
crotch as his hand runs down my arm.
    “Uh,  we learned two  different types of salsa. They didn’t  teach me this
in class.”
    The rumble of his chest is the only response I get.
    I  look around, curious if  anyone else sees this. My body molds into his.
A crowd of people dances to the music, oblivious of Noah’s advances as his

132
stiff cock presses against my ass cheeks. I press into him, unintentionally of
course.
    Sign me up for the next confession slot.
    Turns  out  Noah seems into  this  back and  forth,  or  lack  thereof. He
moves us along to the music. One of his hands presses on my hip, holding
me flushed against him while his other hand pushes my hair away from my
neck.
    “Did  you wear that color dress for me?” His husky voice makes my head
swim. How can he tell what color my dress is when it’s dark outside?
    “It’s  navy. What do you mean?” Okay, it isn’t. But boys suck at knowing
anything beyond basic colors.
    “Hmm,  weird.  On your  Insta story it  looked like the  same color as my
eyes. But maybe I’m wrong, just seeing things.”
    “That’s  often a sign of  narcissism. You should get yourself checked out
when you have a chance. I don’t do everything to appease you.” Unfiltered
words flow from my mouth.
    He  shuts me  up by  pushing  his rigid   length into  me.  I  groan at  the
feeling, my body heating up at his boldness.
    “Tell  me you’re  not affected by this connection between us.” His husky
whisper sends a shiver down my spine. He trails a finger down the length of
my throat to my collarbone, stopping right above my cleavage.
    No  way I will  admit anything to him.
    “Not   sure what  you’re  talking   about. Do  you  try  this  with  all   your
floozies?” Who the hell  says floozies anymore? Alcohol makes me stupid.
So, so stupid.
    “I  think  you know.” His  hands grip me possessively as our hips move to
the music. I withhold a moan as my head rolls back into his chest, his dick
pressing into my ass, a hint at the size of him.
    He blows  hot air into the shell of my  ear, causing my core to pulse with
need. My body burns wherever he touches, his fingers skimming down the
smooth material of my dress. A delicate layer protecting my body from his
touch.
    “You  drive me crazy. I keep thinking about fucking you, wondering how
you sound when you explode in ecstasy. The moans you’ll make while you
greedily take my cock. Is it breathy? Loud?”
    My  stomach flutters at the sensation of his teeth grazing my ear lobe. I
tilt my head to the side, giving him better access to my neck, his lips trailing

133
kisses down the curve of  it.  His touch  makes me pant. My  resolve slips,
begging me to give into him.
    Take me home, I want to say. But I don’t, letting my body say the words
my mouth can’t get out.
    It’s a problem for future me.
    What’s one night with him? We’re adults who can keep a secret.
    Noah  senses my submission. His lips  press against the hollow  of  my
throat, his tongue darting out to  taste me, making my body  shudder as he
sucks on the sensitive skin.
    Someone grabs my hand and tugs me away, cold air hitting  my skin in
Noah’s absence. He growls at the intrusion.
    “Maya,  just the girl  I’ve  been looking for. Your brother is  searching for
you. You remember him, right? Noah’s teammate.” Sophie emphasizes her
words. How did she even find us in this crowd, a cluster of bodies dancing
together?
    I  shake away the lust-induced cloud. Music thumping in the background
washes over me, reminding me of where we are. Dance lights illuminate my
shoes. If I click them together, can I go home?
    “I  better get going. Sister duties and all. Thanks for the dance,” my voice
rasps.
    Whatever we did  is nothing like  any dance I’ve experienced in my life.
My eyes meet Noah’s intense ones, a swirl  of lust  and frustration evident
even in the dark.
    “This  isn’t over.” His  husky voice hints at a promise.
    “It   is for now, Romeo. Let’s go, Juliet.”  Sophie pulls me away, proving
herself to be the best cockblocker.
    She keeps her cool until we find an empty corner.
    “Uh,  where’s my brother?”
    “Who  the heck knows. I needed an excuse to get you out of there before
you and Noah screwed each other on the dance floor. What happened to you
staying away from  him? I  was practically  fanning myself  while watching
the two of you.” She demonstrates with her hands.
    My  lips tip up in a smile. “I  didn’t peg you for a voyeur.”
    “You’re  not  using your  shitty evasion techniques on me. I see through
them a mile away; don’t insult my talents. Are you trying to get with him or
avoid him? You need to  decide.” She taps her sneaker on the ground and

134
crosses her arms. A ridiculous  look  only  Sophie can  pull  off,  her fluffy
dress and white sneakers shining in the dark.
    “I   don’t really  know.” I  shrug because I genuinely don’t know  what to
make of this thing  between Noah and me. An  out-of-control  magnetism I
can’t describe.
    “You  guys were a modern-day Dirty Dancing scene. I don’t buy it. What
are you going to do about this thing between you both?”
    “Uh,  ‘thing’   is a bit of a stretch. That’s the closest we’ve ever gotten to
each other. Attraction, yes. Thing, no.” I shake my head from side to side.
    Her  elevated eyebrow fails to reassure me. “You’re into  your brother’s
teammate. And rival I might add.”
    “No,”    I  stutter.  My  weight   shifts  from  foot   to  foot.  “I’m   sexually
attracted to him. Not like into him as a person because I barely know him.”
    “Right.”   She draws the word out.  “We’ll  have to  keep you away from
him.”
    “We?”  My turn to be confused.
    “Liam  and I. Duh. That’s what friends do.”
    Never have I  been so thankful for a friend. Sophie and I stumble out of
the party hand in hand, leaving behind sucky decisions and bad boys.

135
16

136
                                                    Noah






I’m into Maya. Like  really into her. She scrolls through her phone, unaware
of her surroundings, or of me checking her out.
    I  want to  hash it out, test the physical connection to its  maximum. See
how  explosive the  sex  is.  Fuck  her  against every  hard  surface in  my
apartment and show her a good time. The idea of exclusive fuck buddies for
the rest of the Championship can be on the table if our sex proves to be as
good as I imagine. Never had a permanent fuck buddy  before, but I think
we can be that great together.
    Liam   jerks me  out  of  my  daydream. He  nudges my  side and  looks
toward the cameras and reporters in front of us.
    “I  wasn’t  paying attention to the question. Can you repeat it?” I  offer a
sly grin.
    The group of  reporters snickers at my honesty. Maya glances at me with
lit-up eyes as her chest shakes from withheld laughter.
    “What  strategies have you taken to defend your undefeated Monaco Prix
title?” The reporter stammers out his question again.
    “Uh,  well  I usually get in the car and practice. Try to go my fastest. You
know, the basics.” I play the jokester today. Stifled laughs carry through the
crowd while a couple cameras click, taking photos and videos.
    Everyone  knows I  hate questions like these. This  reporter is probably
new and unaware of my preference. Viewers eat this up, loving  the way I
act and how I present myself. They’re fans of mine for a reason.
    Reporters drone on. Not wanting  to make myself look  like  a total idiot
before a race, I make sure to pay attention to them this time. Sponsors may
assume I partied too hard in Monaco. I even listen when they ask Santi how
he feels about his second-place qualifier.
    “Pretty  good. It’s  nice when my hard work  pays off. Last year I  retired
early from  Monaco after an engine failure  so I’m  excited to  get back out
there and compete against people I’ve looked up to for years.”
    I  nod, impressed with his answer. It seems like he’s been working on his
PR skills.

137
    Once the press conference ends, I stroll off the stage and head straight to
Maya. “Funny, I never saw you again after the fashion show. Where did you
disappear to?” Both my dick and I are curious where she and Sophie ran off
to.
    She keeps scrolling  through her  phone. I push one finger  down  on it,
revealing the screen. She’s ignoring me for Instagram?
    I  press the auto-lock button on  the side of her  phone. The dark screen
taunts her to look up at me, and she plays right into my hand.
    I  don’t  like how  her brown eyes intensely stare into mine, guarded and
unexpressive.
    “I   spent time  with  my  brother  and Sophie  before calling  it  an  early
night.” Her eyes dart to the side while answering.
    “Funny  thing because I ran into your brother five minutes after you left.
He was surprised when I asked if he was able to get in contact with you. He
tried to call you,  but you didn’t  pick up. We ended up spending the rest of
the night  talking with  sponsors.” I  shrug, trying  to  come off  unfazed. In
reality, it  ticks me off  how  Sophie dragged Maya away. How  messed up.
Sadly, I had  to whack  off  in the  bathroom after Maya  left  to relieve  the
raging hard-on I had. Embarrassing as fuck. Sophie’s the worst cockblocker
ever, taking Maya away right when she gave in to me.
    The pink shade of her cheeks deepens, revealing enough to me.
    “Would  you  look at the two  of you, all  cozy and shit. What secrets are
you discussing? How to beat me tomorrow?”
    I  roll  my eyes at Liam’s interruption before I run a hand down my face.
Can Maya and I not get a second alone?
    “I’m   spying for my brother. My loyalty  is always to him.” Maya taps her
Bandini hat. The brim shows an embroidered seven on it. What would it be
like if  she wore my number twenty-eight? I envision her in a shirt with  my
name on it instead of Santiago’s.
    She screws me all up inside, making me want ridiculous things.
    “I   better get going anyway because Santi and I have a lunch  to go to.
Good luck tomorrow, Liam. See you later, Noah.” She scurries away.
    “Bro,  you don’t want to tap that. She’s your teammate’s sister. Not worth
it.”
    Liam   telling   me to   not  hook  up  with  someone is   unheard of,  the
equivalent of him telling me to throw a race. It just isn’t done.

138
    “Seeing as you tap anything with  two legs and fake boobs, why are you
giving me  advice right now?”  I  struggle to cover up  my annoyance. That
came out rough, even for my standards.
    Liam  puts both palms in the air. “Woah, no need to take it out on me. Or
make it personal for that matter. If you need to fuck someone, pick a girl up
at one of the events. They’re easy ass.”
    Therein lies the problem. I have no interest in hooking up with a random
chick,  and I  haven’t  for  a  while.  When  was the  last  time  I  slept with
someone casually like that?
    Liam  mistakes my silence for acceptance. “Listen, bro. A word of advice
—even though  you’re  being  a dick  right   now. People like   Maya  don’t
casually hook up with people like us. She’s the type to get feelings and end
up wanting more.” Liam shudders dramatically.
    “What’s  wrong with feelings?”
    He  looks at  me like  I’ve  grown two  heads. Granted, I guess I usually
don’t care for women’s feelings.
    “They  develop into more. Then it  becomes proposals, sacrifices, babies
crying. The  works. One day  you wake  up and wonder  where time went.
You’ll be forty  years old, your wife will  barely fuck you anymore, and next
thing you know, you’re masturbating to porn every day to get by.”
    I  still jack off  now. Not exactly a trade-off.
    Liam  comes off  uncharacteristically bitter, which  I  find  weird because
his parents have a perfect marriage. I mean, I’m  already thirty.  Not like  I
want to be alone for the rest of my life, only  while I  compete in racing and
live on the road.
    “Not   sure how hooking up  with  Maya turned into  a ten-year life  plan.
But thanks for  your concern.” I  pat him  on the shoulder while  rolling  my
eyes.
    “I   want to warn  you. She’s one of those girls  that’ll  bring you  to your
knees. I’m telling  you. You’ll  be turning  in your  man card and wondering
where you went wrong. Swapping out new girls  for the same chick. Same
pussy for the rest of your life.”
    His  vision of marriage is kind of  dark, unlike his usually optimistic  self.
Don’t know  what crawled up his  ass today. I leave him behind, my  mood
tainted by his words.

139
The day of the Monaco race, I search around for Maya because I don’t see
or hear from her. I  end up in  the Bandini bar area in  a last-ditch effort  to
find her. Sophie sips espresso at one of the tables, casually flipping through
a magazine, not a care in the world.
    “Have  you seen Maya?” I  keep my voice low  as I plant my  butt in  the
chair across from her.
    She sips her drink. “Like recently?”
    Why  is she playing  dumb? “Yes. Within   the last few  hours?” It  takes
effort to keep my teeth from grinding.  My  dentist won’t be happy with  me
next time he sees me.
    She finds  my reaction funny, her eyes betraying her amusement. “Why
do you want to know?”
    “Answer  the damn question. Not that hard,” I blurt out.
    Her   eyes roll   at my   rough  tone. I’ve   visited  her  house during  the
holidays, so we’ve known each other casually for years. She reminds me of
an annoying third cousin because we’re not close enough to be considered
siblings.
    “No  need to  get your race suit  in a twist.  She decided to watch like  a
normal bystander today, wanting to film the experience for her vlog.”
    Doesn’t  Maya know  that’s not a good idea? People will  recognize her;
drunks will  try to grope her. I don’t  like  the thought of her being out there
by herself.
    “Why   aren’t  you out  there with  her?”  AKA  why are  you sitting  here
drinking coffee while your friend is out by herself in a crazy crowd?
    “I   was going  to hang  out in  the pit  with  my  dad. This  is  one of  the
biggest races of the year, so I’m sure it’ll be crazy down there.”
    I  pull  out my  phone before she finishes her sentence. She watches as I
tap around on the screen.
    I  break the silence after a few minutes. “What’s your number?”
    “Seriously,  you try  to hit on me after  you ask where my friend  is? You
were dry-humping her the other day.”
    My  jaw  clenches. “No. You’re  skipping out on  the pit today. Your  dad
sent me a ticket, beyond enthused that you want to see the race like a true
fan.”
    I  smirk  at  her wide  eyes while  she tells me  her number. She doesn’t
speak another word, thank God. Maya can avoid  me all  she wants, but it

140
doesn’t mean she has to do it alone. I’ll get my way eventually. These types
of games don’t phase me because I have enough stamina to outdo her.
    My  lips  twitch  as I think  up a plan to  get her alone after the race. She
can evade me all she wants, but it doesn’t mean I need to. Two can play this
game.

141
17

142
                                                    Maya






I hear Sophie before I see her. She yells at a guy to stop accosting her in the
stands. Her vocab choices are something else, a testament to reading one
too many classic novels.
    She makes her way toward the seat next to mine  and settles down. We
look the same, twinning in Bandini polos and ear protection gear.
    “What  are you  doing here? I thought  you wanted to spend time in  the
pit.”
    Nearby fans give us weird looks. I tug my hat lower on my face and pull
down my sound-reducing earmuffs to hear her better.
    She shrugs, picking up that trick from me. I nudge her in the ribs.
    “Ouch.  Fine. No need to get physical. Noah cornered me earlier asking
where you were.” She rubs her rib.
    Did  I hear her right? “And  you ended up here how?”
    “Noah  forced me to, I guess so you’re not alone.”
    It  shocks me that he even cares.
    “Did  he say anything else?” I fiddle with the settings on my camera.
    “He  said, and I  quote—”  her voice  drops lower to  imitate Noah’s—“I
didn’t  know she was a fan  of  hiding. Let  her know  when I  find  her, she
won’t like it.  I was the champ at hide-and-seek growing up.”
    “What? Seriously?” My  voice screeches.
    “No!   That’s a terrible  pick-up  line. He’s  better than that. I’m   messing
with  you.”  Her laugh  fills  the silence.  She’s giving  me a severe case of
emotional whiplash today. “But  there was some observable tension. I may
conclude that he likes when you hang out on race days?”
    “I  didn’t  think he cared if I was around on Sundays.”
    Her  eyes shine. “Hmm. I  don’t know  about that. Noah seemed agitated
that you weren’t around earlier. At least enough to ask me about it.”
    Announcers cut  off  our conversation, letting  the crowd  know the race
will begin momentarily.
    The  crowd  quiets down  as red lights  flash  above the  grid.  Everyone
holds their  breath for  the  start of  the  race, electric  energy charging the
stands as race car  engines rev. My   heart beats along  with  the  flashing

143
signals above the grid. The moment the lights  change, cars take off down
the track toward the first turn. The Monaco Prix circuit  can be unforgiving,
especially if a driver  makes an error, like under- or overestimating a speed
during a curve.
    Noah  keeps his  lead around  the first   bend, with  my  brother  not  far
behind. Santiago’s car zooms past one of the straightaways before turning
another tight corner. Liam and Jax compete against each other for the third
position.
    Monaco’s track seems unlike any other in the Prix schedule. Constricted
roads keep cars compacted, not allowing much room for mistakes. Jax and
Liam avoid a disastrous collision with each other at one of the turns. Pieces
of metal  fly  as the  cars graze one another, the  sound of  clanging metal
against the ground ringing  across the Prix. The  crowd gasps as Jax’s car
careens toward the side. He uses his momentum to get back on the track,
narrowly avoiding a catastrophic crash.
    Hums of  the cars zipping across the pavement fill me with excitement as
Noah and Santi pass us, completing their first lap. The crowd feels alive and
energetic, chanting out the  names of their  favorite  drivers  while  waving
flags and signs in the air. My own body  pulses with exhilaration as Sophie
and I get up to  cheer. Fans hang out on nearby balconies, overlooking the
race from hotel rooms.
    The  smell of  burning  rubber fills  my  nose, a scent I’ve  come to  love
during my time here.
    Noah  continues  to  fight   for  the  lead  with  my  brother.  He  remains
defensive of his position,  which makes it  hard for Santi  and others to get
ahead of him.  My  brother tries  to overtake him  multiple  times  but can’t
since the Monaco course makes it  tough to  rise up  the ranks. Often,  the
position you start with is the one you end with as long as you don’t crash.
    At  one of the sharper turns, my brother tries to overtake Noah again. He
does it  sloppily, brushing  Noah’s front  wing,  causing Noah’s  car to  fall
behind. My  brother secures the first-place position.  Noah must be pissed
because he detests when cars have contact with one another. The whole race
turns out to be a messy one with shrapnel flying and cars colliding.
    The  crowd grows  silent as Liam  crashes into one  of the  barriers. His
front tire  flies off,  and the severe damage makes him retire from the  race
early. He splays his hands against his helmet as the cameras pan over him.
Sophie’s eyes cloud and her teeth chew on her bottom lip.

144
    During  one of the final laps, my brother lets down his defensive position
enough for Noah to sneak up next to him.  Their front  wings drive side by
side, almost touching, as they race down a straight together. They approach
a narrow corner. I hold my breath, unable to look away as Noah accelerates
while turning.  His side tires lift  from  the ground, losing  important contact
and traction to turn. A  dangerous move that pays off as his car surges past
Santi’s, securing first place again. The crowd goes wild at the move  Noah
pulled, and I’m finding it hard to hide my bounce of excitement.
    Noah ends up passing the finish line first. A checkered flag waves in the
air, rustling against the wind.  The fans eagerly cheer when they announce
Noah as the winner of the Monaco Grand Prix. Sophie and I bounce up and
down when my brother zooms past the finish line as the runner-up.
    Bandini  had a great racing day. They  prove time and time  again to be
one of the strongest teams with Noah and Santi at the wheel, another race
closer to winning the Constructors’ Championship.
    Sophie  and I  wait   with  the  masses while the  drivers  complete their
victory lap.  We end up leaving  the stadium area once the guys start their
usual press circuit.
    We meet up with the Bandini team at the winners’ podium. Noah stands
in the middle, with  Santi and Jax at his sides. It fills  me with happiness to
see both of the Bandini  boys getting  along with  one another, laughing at
something going on between the three racers.
    Santi  and Jax pour  champagne all over  Noah. The crowd  screams as
champagne sprays all over them, the sticky  alcohol making  the air  smell
like  a classy  frat party.  The  podium area is  a  mosh pit  of  alcohol  and
cheering fans.
    Noah  notices me from  my  spot  behind the blockades, shooting  me a
panty-melting grin. He tips his big champagne bottle to me before he chugs.
I smile back at him and give him a thumbs up, incredibly proud of him. The
sight of his  lips wrapped around the bottle brings naughty thoughts to  the
forefront of my mind.
    Sophie joins  her dad in the celebrations with  the pit team while  I head
back toward the suites to chill while Santi does his other interviews.
    I  wait in the suite, surprised when the door opens earlier than I thought.
    “Hey,  you’re  back earlier—”  I stop mid-sentence when Noah smiles at
me.

145
    He  recently took a shower. His hair is  slicked back, no evidence of his
hands raking through the strands yet. A new  Bandini shirt  presses against
the tight muscles of his chest. I lick  my lips as my eyes roam over the rest
of him, taking in expensive looking jeans that cling to his legs.
    “What   are you doing  here? Your suite  is next  door.”  I  don’t  like  the
mischievous grin plastered on his face at the moment. Not one bit.
    He closes the distance, shushing me by pressing his finger up against my
lips.
    “I   came to collect my post-race winnings.” He  drags a calloused finger
from my lips to my throat.
    “Uh,   I’m   pretty  sure they  already  gave you  the  trophy,”   I  whisper
huskily.
    Noah’s  grin widens  as his blue eyes pierce mine. The  air in  the small
room feels heavy, like all the oxygen was sucked out of it. He’s a hurricane
catching me in  the eye of  the storm, giving  me  a false sense of security
before the winds pick up again. A catastrophic and relentless disaster in the
making.
    He  steps away from me. The  click  of the lock  sounds loud, sending a
shiver up my back.
    “This  isn’t  funny, Noah. Go to your own suite.” I take a step back while
he takes a few steps forward, eliminating the gap.
    “I’m   not trying to be funny. You’ve been avoiding me.”
    Uh,  yes, I have. After the fashion show I’ve made myself scarce around
here. I don’t  trust my urges around him, but  I don’t  say anything because
his ego gets fed enough.
    “Not   sure what  you’re   talking  about. I’ve   been busy.”  I’d   probably
sound ten times  more convincing  if  my  voice  wasn’t rasping.  My  body
betrays me, unable to keep up with Noah’s persistence.
    “I  follow  you on Instagram. I’ve seen your stories.”
    Oh. This is the second time he’s mentioned watching them. I didn’t even
think he had the time to see them, but he must have checked out my movie
and spa day posts.
    “Sometimes you need a day off.”
    “You  took two.”  The back of his hand strokes my face. When did he get
so close? And why does that feel amazing?
    I  shut my eyes at the incredible contact.

146
    The same hand wraps around the back of my head and pulls me forward.
My  eyes  snap open.  His   clean scent  surrounds me  and  muddles  my
thoughts. He doesn’t give me another second to think before his mouth is on
mine, soft lips pressing against my own.
    At  first, the kiss is soft and sweet—innocent and unexpected from a man
like him. He plays, leaving behind gentle pecks.
    His  teeth graze my bottom lip,  rough with  a bite  of pain. I  gasp at the
sensation. His tongue takes the opportunity to invade my mouth and stroke
against mine, a relentless exploration demanding everything from  me. He
tastes like  mint   and champagne, a  shockingly  wonderful   combination.
Kissing him is a mind-numbing experience. His hands roam over my body,
pulling me into  him as his mouth stifles my  moan. An impressive erection
pushes against my jeans. One of his hands runs through my hair while the
other grips my  face, making it  impossible for  me to  get away. Not like  I
want to. Oh, no, when I commit to being bad, I’m all in.
    My  heart hammers in  my chest. I  wrap my  arms around Noah's neck,
pulling  him in  closer, giving  in  to  our attraction.  His  hair feels  soft and
smooth beneath my   fingers  as I  run   them through  his  strands.  Knees
threaten to buckle. I try to make sense of all the sensations happening inside
me,  experiencing   the  best   kiss   of   my   life—both    intoxicating   and
exhilarating. My body feels like putty in his hands, begging to be touched.
    “Why  is my  door locked? Hello, Maya, are you in there? Open up.” My
brother’s voice hits me like  an ice-cold shower. Pounding fists against the
door beat alongside my heart.
    I   break apart from  Noah’s  mouth  and take a  few  steps back, nearly
stumbling over the couch. A disheveled mess of hair makes me smile. His
eyes stare at me, wild-looking  and hazy, and his  pants have a prominent
swell. I can’t deny the pride that surges through me about doing that to him.
    Go me.
    He holds up a finger to his mouth. One side of his mouth tips up, and his
eyes shine, swirling shades of blue I’ve come to like. How  is he always so
unaffected? It seems unfair. I look back down at his pants to double-check.
    Nope, he’s affected.
    The  doorknob rattles, guilt replacing the pride  I felt  seconds ago. Santi
would kill  me if he found me in here with Noah.
    “Carajo.   How  is  my room  locked? Who  has the key?”  My   brother’s
voice fades away with the sound of his footsteps.

147
    “You  need to go now. I’ll make sure he left.” I push past him.
    He  grabs  my  elbow  and pulls   me back  toward  him.  A  quick   peck
silences me. My brain hasn’t caught up to my  body yet, leaning back into
him like we can continue what happened.
    “Relax.  He doesn’t have to know.”  His wicked  eyes graze over me one
more time before he exits the room.
    I  plop myself  down on the couch, running a hand down my  face. What
the hell did I do? I can’t do this to Santi. Can I?
    Why did one kiss feel like it opened me up for anything?





Two weeks have passed since The Kiss. I needed to take a temporary leave
of  absence from the  race  schedule, which  meant I  skipped  out  on  the
Canadian Grand Prix. Santi begged me to come, but I made up an excuse
about wanting to go home. Lying to him  made me feel worse, my stomach
in endless knots as I packed my bags and purchased a ticket to Spain. I told
him the traveling exhausts me. Which isn’t  far from  the truth; I  can’t help
how the man we travel with  tires me emotionally and physically. Life’s  all
about semantics.
    Sophie pled with  me too, but  my mind was made up. I  needed to clear
my head.
    Jax took  home the trophy for  the race with  Liam being  runner-up, and
my brother placing third. For the first time this season, Noah didn’t make it
to the podium.
    Sophie must have given Noah my  number because he sent me multiple
texts last week. I made an incognito contact name for him, just in case Santi
gets a hold of my phone. Blame reading Harry Potter during my race hiatus
for the contact name.

         He  Who  Shall  Not  Be  Fucked  (06/10 5:00  p.m.):  Are  you
         flying  in late? Santiago is here but you aren’t.

         He  Who  Shall Not  Be Fucked  (06/11 2:37 p.m.):  Found out
         from    your    brother   that   you’re    not    coming.   Isn’t    he
         superstitious? You’ve been to every race so far.

148
         He  Who   Shall  Not  Be  Fucked   (06/13  4:56  p.m.):  Didn’t
         place on the podium. Maybe I’m the superstitious one.

    My  stomach dipped at the last one. I didn’t want Noah to do poorly since
he is my brother’s teammate, but he didn’t lose because I wasn’t there.
    I  pulled up a YouTube interview of  Noah after the race, telling myself I
did it to ease my curiosity.
    Noah looked  good in his red race suit with  his sweaty hair plastered to
his head. He rocked the messy look.
    The reporter jammed the foam microphone in Noah’s face.
    “What  happened today out there on the track?”
    “Just an off  day. It happens. I’m happy for my teammate and my friends
who did place.” His tight smile begged to differ.
    “Have  anything different planned for the next Prix?”
    Noah  glanced at the camera. His deep blue eyes looked hazy, blocking
off any readable emotions.
    “I   think I  need to change up my pre-race ritual. A  couple things might
not be  working  for  me anymore. But  more  on that  later. Don’t  want  to
reveal my secrets.” He ended the interview with a lazy smile.
    After  watching  his interview  yesterday, I ignored his texts for  a whole
day. I lasted twenty-four hours before giving in to answering him, the image
of him  frowning   into the  camera plaguing my  thoughts. Three thousand
miles do nothing to ease the pull he has on me.

         Maya   (06/14  1:14  p.m.):  I’m   sure  you’ll   place next  time.
         You’re one of the best.

         He  Who  Shall  Not  Be  Fucked  (06/14 1:16  p.m.):  Are  you
         coming to  that one? Did you get my earlier messages? I didn’t
         get a response.

    I  would  never peg someone like him to question if  I  got his messages.
Has he ever sent that to a woman before? The notion makes me take pity on
him and answer quicker than usual.

         Maya  (06/14 1:30 p.m.):  I’ll  be there. Needed a vacation from
         all  the traveling.

149
    I  choose to ignore his second message because he crosses lines I’m not
ready for yet.
    He Who Shall Not Be Fucked (06/14 1:43 p.m.): Good. See you then.
    That  went easier than I thought. I  need to face him, but I  need a game
plan first, particularly a Sophie-made plan.

150
18

151
                                                    Noah






Is this what it  feels like to be ghosted? I’ve done it to  girls in  the past, but
I’ve  never been on the receiving  end. And  to be honest, it  totally  sucks.
Karma really is a bitch after all.
    I   haven’t seen Maya  since  Monaco.  She barely  answers any of  my
messages, which makes me second-guess if  I  kissed her  too soon.  Me,
second-guessing. What a joke. Sometimes she seems in to me, but stuff she
does makes me uncertain. A foreign sensation to say the least.
    I  land in Baku  two days earlier to get acclimated to the city. That and I
want to be around when Santi and his sister arrive because I want to catch
Maya when he leaves.
    Wednesday goes by without a sign of  her during our  sponsor meetings
and ass-kissing specials. But Maya doesn’t come to any of  them. I  worry
she wants to back out of coming to another race because of me.
    I  give in to  my curiosity and ask Santi about her while we walk back to
the hospitality suites after our press conference.
    “Where’s  your sister been?”
    He turns his head slowly toward me, revealing squinted eyes and a tight
jaw. I don’t  get intimidated by him.  His scary face comes off like  a puppy
dog, not threatening like his dad’s.
    “Busy.  She visited our parents back in Spain. Why?” He glares at me.
    “Was  curious why  she didn’t  come to  the last Prix.  Wondered how it
would affect your racing.” My cocky grin  seems to placate him. Back to our
usually scheduled programming  with  one  another—me being the  cocky
asshole and him taking it.
    He  scoffs. “I  did  fine.  I raced without  my  sister by  my side for  years
while she was in college. You’re the one who struggled this time.”
    Santi has a fight in him. Good to know.
    “Yup.  You  win some, you  lose some.” I  shrug. “Is  she coming to  this
race?” I can’t tell if my voice sounds disinterested enough.
    “Yeah. She’s already here.”
    I  follow   Santi  to the  hospitality  suite, disappointed when  Maya  isn’t
there.

152
    “Is  Maya hanging out in there?”
    He stares at me, his head tilting to the side as his lips press together in a
tight line.  “Nah, she went to  hang out with  Sophie. Said something about
exploring the city for her vlog.”
    My  eyes nearly bug out of my head. They’re out alone in a random city
they’ve never visited  before where the people speak a different language.
What if someone recognizes them?
    “They   should  be  more  careful.   Why  do  you   let  them  go  out   by
themselves? That’s irresponsible.”
    Santi’s gaze hardens. “I can take care of my sister. It’s a safe city.”
    “I  think  you forget  you’re worth  over twenty million  dollars now. Why
do you think  people are  kidnapped for ransom? Hint,  it’s  not always  for
pretty looks.”
    His  ignorance grates on me.
    Santi’s  jaw ticks.  He takes a couple of  deep breaths while I  stare him
down. I piss him off, but he can be a real idiot sometimes.
    “Thanks for  the advice.” He enters his suite and slams the door.
    I  text Maya to check if she still has a pulse.

         Maya  (06/19  6:58 p.m.):  Thanks for  asking. We’re all  good.
         Going to dinner and then bed. Good luck at practice tomorrow.

    I  need to come up with something to do together that doesn’t include me
shoving my tongue down her throat. Which I  still  want to do, but we have
to do fun stuff too. A plan comes to mind so I enlist my friends to help me.
She needs to see what she can have if she gives us a chance.





“Grab the girls and meet me at the Baku kart area.”
    Liam  stares at me like I’m  talking to him  in another language. Yeah, he
speaks German, but he understands English fine.
    “Why  are we doing this again?” His voice matches the incredulous look
on his face.
    “Because I  want us all  to  have fun before the race. What’s  so hard to
believe?” I control the urge to roll my eyes.

153
    “Uh  yeah. Your usual pre-race fun involves being balls deep inside of a
model.”
    I   punch him  in  the arm.  “Fuck  you.  Don’t  tell   Maya I  planned  this
because then she won’t come.” My teeth grind together—my new bad habit
lately, kind of like  stalking Maya’s social media accounts. I’ve become that
guy. The one checking her profile to the point of addiction, sneaking quick
glances at what she does to fill the void of her absence.
    Jax and Liam can take credit while I pretend to join because I don’t want
her to find out I  put in this much effort.  Her avoiding me for  weeks forced
me to plan something drastic for her attention.
    “All   right  no need to hit so hard. I’ll   meet you there.” He rubs his arm
and pouts.
    Liam  pulls up to the kart track an hour later. Jax, Maya, and Sophie hop
out of the rental car. I didn’t  invite  Santi because I’m not a total dumbass,
mainly because he’s been paying extra attention to  me recently, sneaking
random glances whenever his sister gets close.
    Maya’s mouth gapes open when she sees me standing there.
    “We’re  going karting?”  Sophie claps her hands and bounces around, her
blonde braids swaying around her while Liam checks her out. He gives me
a hard time with Maya when he makes heart eyes at Sophie.
    “I  haven’t done this since I was a kid.”  Maya looks at the helmet in my
hand. She blushes when I  pass it to  her, our  hands grazing against each
other.
    “You   only   had  an  opportunity  to  ride   karts  when  you  stole  your
brother’s. So  here’s your  chance to  drive  them for   real. Don’t   put any
unicorn stickers on them.” That  totally makes it  sound like I  planned this.
There goes my idea of her not knowing about it. Real subtle, Noah.
    “Oh,   no. But  you  guys are professionals. How  is  that even  remotely
fair?” Sophie crosses her arms over her chest.
    Maya  rubs her  hands together while  she shoots Sophie a grin  full   of
mischief.
    “Sophie, they’re used to fast cars. We’ve got this.”
    That gleam in her eye? Definitely should be worried; no doubt she wants
to kick our asses.
    Turns  out Maya does precisely that on  the first  run. I  had no clue she
was talented with a kart, and fuck it turns me on. I could blame the fact that

154
I haven’t kart-raced in  a while,  but she’s a natural at it. Absolutely  wiped
the track with us.
    My  dick  twitches at Maya sitting  there, gloating in her kart, arms up in
the air in  triumph. She looks  sexy as fuck with  her helmet  and borrowed
race suit. I didn’t  peg myself for  having a racing fetish, but looking  at her
now makes me rethink the idea, especially when she whips off her helmet to
reveal messy hair.
    An  unknown sensation from the top  of my  head to the tips of  my toes
surges through me at planning something she likes. She smiles at  Sophie
from the mini  podium they have meant for kids. I wish  she would smile at
me like she does with  others, beautiful with  a hint of  trouble. Liam  and I
grab the champagne bottles I kept hidden in a bag and spray them all over
the girls.
    “Hello,   aren’t we the ones who should be spraying champagne?” Maya
gets the words out between laughs.
    Liam  and I pass them new bottles that are the same ones we use on the
stage. Went for the full F1 effect today. I pop the cork before letting go, the
bottle nearly dropping before Maya grips it with two hands.
    Maya  proceeds to pour it  all  over me.  The cool liquid   runs down my
shirt, wet material plastering to  my torso. Her eyes heat up at the sight of
my abs before they roam over my body. I give her a wicked smile. She hops
off the stage, lunging to the side, but my reflexes make me quicker.
    I  haul her over  my shoulder like  a fireman’s carry. She squirms about,
making it   difficult   for  me to  hold  on  to  her. My   hand smacks her ass
playfully to get her to stop.
    “Ay!  Watch it. That’s the no-go zone.” She shakes from laughter.
    No  clue what the no-go zone is, but I’m  all for  exploring it. She should
know by  now  that I  don’t  follow  the rules,  preferring to  bend them into
submission.
    “Precious cargo. Everyone, please move out of the way.”
    Kids  and parents part at my  request. Maya’s giggles turn  into a  snort,
which makes her laugh more, her body vibrating against mine.
    “The  blood’s rushing to my head. I can’t think straight.”
    “Join  the club.” I refer to a different head than she is. She gets the joke a
second too late and her body shakes from more laughter.
    “Oh  my God, you  can’t say stuff like that. Like  ever.” More laughs as I
smack her ass again. I love the feel of it beneath my palm, my dick stirring

155
while a smile breaks out on my face.
    I   carry her  to  the waiting  town  car.  We all  drive  back  to  the hotel,
soaking wet from champagne. Maya gives me the biggest grin that reaches
her eyes, and damn if my lungs don’t burn at my sudden intake of breath.





“Hi, everyone. Maya here with the amazing Noah Slade. He agreed to do an
exclusive interview for  my vlog.”  She looks gorgeous with her hair down.
Today she wears shorts that show off her golden legs, ones I want wrapped
around my waist while I pound into her. I’m so curious to hear the different
noises she makes during sex. Is she a screamer? A moaner? I’ll volunteer to
figure it out.
    She smiles at the camera she situated on a rolling cart in the pit garage.
We position ourselves next to my race car, the vibrant red calling my name
as Maya’s ass leans against it. Low beeps from the pit computers sound off
in the background.
    “You  think I’m  amazing?” I forget the camera for a second. Like the sad
sap I am lately  around her, I  love hearing anything  she has to share, any
revelation about her feelings.  A  fucking  breadcrumb would  be nice. She
taunts me daily despite the way she guards herself, keeping her lips sealed,
both literally   and figuratively.  There  are few  opportunities  for  us to  be
alone. Sophie magically finds us every time we get a moment by ourselves,
which makes me  want to  take  drastic measures to spend time  with  her,
including this exclusive interview.
    And  everyone knows I hate interviews.
    She rolls her eyes with minimal  effort. “Hush,  I wonder if  you consume
extra calories to feed your ego. Anyway,  fans want a backstage exclusive.
They’re curious to learn more about you. So I copied a famous game called
Web’s Most Searched Answers.”
    She passes me a cardboard poster with my name in a Google search bar,
along with a bunch of tape-covered questions. I recognize it so I guess I’m
famous enough to play it.
    “Our  first question is…”  She expectantly looks at me, making me smile.
Her parted lips tempt me to take a risk and kiss her.

156
    I  cough to cover up a groan, and then I tear off the tape for the first piece
of paper.
    “What  is Noah Slade’s height? Well, I’m  six  foot. Which  is considered
on the  taller  end for   F1. They  make  the cars to  fit   around our  bodies
specifically.  My  feet  are near  the tip  of   the front  wing   up  against the
pedals.”
    Her hands motion for me to continue. All right, I get it.
    “Who  is  Noah Slade and Santiago Alatorre.”   I  pause. “I’m  Noah. No
surprise there. And Santiago is my partner and Maya’s brother.” I  point at
her like an idiot  because obviously they know  that. “He’s a  Spanish dude
who’s  loud  and rarely  beats me  at  racing.  Still   needs to  work  on  his
overtaking skills and not crashing into me from behind.”
    Maya  sticks her tongue out at me, making me think about her tongue on
other places of my body. Not  a convenient time for  a boner with  cameras
rolling. I shift  against the hood of the car, discreetly adjusting my pants.
    “Ha.  Ha. Everyone can tune in for your comedy career once you’re done
with racing.”
    Fat  chance that happens. I chuckle as I rip off the tape to reveal another
question.
    “What  is Noah Slade’s net worth? I’m not one to brag because that’s not
polite and I  was raised better. But I think  last time I  checked, about three
hundred million.  Give  or  take. Received good advice  from  my financial
advisor about always  investing your  money. Don’t   let it  sit  in  the  bank
gathering dust. So that’s what I do to multiply the amount I do have. Not to
mention real estate investments.”
    Maya  lets out a low  whistle. “I’m   impressed. We’re talking to a World
Champion here who gives free monetary advice.”
    “You  know what they say…the bigger the bank account…” I waggle my
brows.
    Maya  ignores the camera and throws her head back. I love the sound of
her laugh;  pride  surges through me  at  amusing her.  Her  exposed neck
entices my inconvenient one-track mind.
    “Who  is Noah Slade’s wife?”
    Wow, she picked hard-hitting questions here.
    I  continue. “I’m  currently on the market. I’ve never married someone so
that’s a  negative. Is  the  statement no wife,   happy life?”   I  wink   at the
camera.

157
    “I  think  you mean happy wife, happy life.” Maya blushes and shakes her
head.
    I  chuckle before  I keep going.  “Where does Noah Slade live? I’m   not
going to give  away my addresses here because I can’t have paparazzi and
fans at my doors all the time. My limited  privacy is the best part of the off-
season. But I own an apartment in Monaco, a house in Italy,  and a loft  in
London. Favorite place to  live  is off  the Amalfi   coast during F1’s winter
breaks. Hands down the best food and views.”
    “Who   can resist gelato? I’ve  never  been to Italy,  but  the food  is  my
favorite. I can’t  wait until  the Prix stop in Milan.  All  right, two  more left.”
She clasps her hands together and looks at me. She crosses her legs again,
drawing my attention toward them once more. I  lick my  bottom lip  before
continuing.
    “When is  Noah Slade retiring?” I blink  at the board. I never think about
retiring, choosing instead to focus on the next year. I’m still  young enough
to not worry  about it. But  the question makes me think about what I’ll  do
once I hit my late thirties.
    “I   bet  you  anything  that  Liam  and  Jax google  this  yearly.  They’re
probably waiting for my announcement since they’re younger. I don’t doubt
it.” Blood  rushes to my dick at the sound of her giggle. I need to get out of
here before I  do something stupid  on camera. “Uh.  I  haven’t considered
retiring anytime  soon. But I  imagine if  I  meet someone special and have
kids, I  may  consider what’s best for  my  family.  But  for  now,  I  plan on
kicking everyone’s asses.”
    Maya  looks surprised at my answer. Hell, I am too. When the fuck have
I thought about having  kids or  a wife? But  the answer falls from  my  lips
with ease, like I think about the notion occasionally.
    “You  never  know what  could happen in  the future.  But  I’m  sure you
have plenty of  time to  figure it  out. F1  racers don’t retire  until  like forty
years old. Basically, you’ll be ancient once you leave here. Okay, last one.”
    Is  that even what I want? To keep racing at the risk of not having a life
to go back to once it’s all done? I don’t want to be like my dad, who parties
with twenty-somethings on private yachts, cruising around by myself.  The
thought creeps me out.
    “Best  Noah Slade team radio?” My  team radio videos on YouTube are
hilarious. “If  you look me up on the internet, you can find lots of  videos of
me cursing at  the team and myself.  A  team radio  is  how Bandini  and I

158
communicate about race stats, car info, and problems. My personal favorite
video is the British  Grand Prix from  2014. Watch it if  you haven’t seen it.
You’ll  be entertained. The pit crew forgot to connect my water pump and I
was basically a cranky baby without a bottle for an hour.”
    I  glance at Maya. Her eyes look up at me and fill my chest with a warm
feeling.
    “Thank  you so much for joining us, Noah. Those were the most googled
questions people wanted answered about Noah so I decided to go straight to
the source. This week I’ll   have exclusive footage from  the McCoy  team,
including  interviews  with   Liam  and  Jax. Stay  tuned. Subscribe  if  you
haven’t already.  See you  next  time!”  She  waves to  her  camera before
shutting it off.
    She looks  like  a natural,  both gorgeous and confident.  It’s  cool she’s
found something she can  be passionate about. Especially if  it  keeps her
entertained and coming back to  all  the races because I don’t  mind these
one-on-one interviews at all.
    “You  forgot  one more question.”  I  don’t  think as the  words leave my
mouth. It  seems like  the  perfect chance to  have her  alone without   any
interruptions of the blonde-haired, green-eyed variety.
    Maya stares up at me, confusion lining her face.
    “Will   Noah Slade ask Maya Alatorre on a date?” I flinch  at my pathetic
pick-up line.
    Not  exactly my best work.  I blame it  on  being out of  practice, not the
way my heart races in my chest at the fear of her rejecting me.
    “A  date? You don’t date.” She messes around with her camera tripod.
    My  hand engulfs hers to stop her fidgeting. Her body tenses as I rub my
thumb across her knuckles, something I noticed  she liked during  the few
times I’ve done it.
    “I  want to try. What’s one date?”
    “Uh,  for  someone who doesn’t ever date…everything.” She tugs on her
hand, trying to free it, but I don’t let it go. Not until I  get what I want.
    “It’s  one date, don’t be dramatic. I’m not asking for a forever… Are you
scared?” I goad her. “We don’t  need to put labels on anything. Let’s  have
fun.”
    “Of  course I’m  not scared. You just want to have fun?” Her brows raise
and her lips form a tight line.

159
    Maybe she won’t be happy with no labels, even though most chicks I get
with don’t mind. Or maybe fun was the wrong word to say because now she
looks at me in a way I can’t read.
    “Then  go on a date with me. Tomorrow?” I can’t tell if she wants to shut
me down.
    “My   brother can’t know. He would  lock me up before killing  you,”  she
sputters.
    All  right, she didn’t say no. I can work with it.
    “What  he doesn’t know won’t  kill  him.  We’re only  having a good time
together.” I want  to tell  her to  stop making a big  deal of  this. Hasn’t she
tried no strings attached? But she agrees, making it a win for me. If there is
something I live by, it’s how there’s no time like the present.
    I  stride away, throwing a victorious grin over my shoulder.

160
19

161
                                                    Maya






“No  way. I’m  not getting  on that thing.”  I  cross my two  index  fingers in
front of  me in  an X.  If   only my  mom  could see me making  responsible
decisions. She’d be proud.
    “Live   a little.”   Noah’s eyes gleam while  mine narrow, not  sharing his
amused look.  He  looks  eerie with   a  flickering   light  above  our  heads,
foreshadowing this bad idea.
    A   shiny  motorbike  brings  a frown   to my   face, the  steel gray  paint
polished and sleek, like an alien spaceship. It should come with a warning
label.
    Hell,  Noah should have a walking, talking warning sign.
    We wage a battle of  wills  in the parking garage of the hotel we’re both
staying at with Bandini. The garage makes the perfect place to meet up for
our date since we can avoid the paparazzi and my brother. Just Noah, me,
and a dimly lit  lot. I don’t  have my usual chaperones keeping me in check.
Much to Sophie’s dismay earlier, I declined her invitation to third wheel our
date. Appreciate her loyalty though.
    “Come  on. It’s not scary. I promise.”
    I   roll  my   eyes. Anyone  will   say  that to   get me  on  the  back  of  a
contraption.
    He steps toward me, wearing down my defenses. He talks low and slow
to me like I’m a scared dog in an alleyway.
    I  push my lower lip out and cross my arms, not above pouting to get my
way. If it works on my parents, then it could work on Noah.
    But  he doesn’t take the bait. I  need to work  on my delivery  because it
sucks.
    “Don’t   make me carry you onto it.  I’ve  driven motorcycles since I was
thirteen. I’m still  alive.”  He waves down his body, bringing my attention to
his leather jacket and dark jeans. His outfit screams bad boy in every good
kind of way. Instead of making me feel better, he distracts me with his tight-
fitting shirt, which accentuates his firm muscles.
    How does he make casual look so good?

162
    “Is  that  supposed to make me feel better? That’s illegal!  Who  in their
right mind would  let a child on a motorbike?” Did  anyone ever watch over
him as a kid?
    He  chuckles, not bothering to address my comment. Instead, he grabs a
black helmet from the seat and puts it on my head, adjusting the straps to fit
my chin. I’d  consider it a lovely  gesture if my heart wasn’t in  my throat at
the moment.
    I  wasn’t  exactly  expecting this when  he told  me to  wear jeans and a
comfortable top earlier.
    “You’re  one hard date to please,” he grumbles.
    I’d  rather not have my body splayed across a street like roadkill.
    “Have  you  even been on a  real date? Usually  normal people go  to  a
restaurant, have dinner, and end it all with a kiss. Stay within  the comfort
zone.” I paint a picture for him since he seems like a visual kind of guy.
    His  chest rumbles with  laughter. “I’ve   dated before, but  I’m  far  from
normal. Why wine and dine you? I’m going to get what I want anyway.” He
waggles his brows.
    Well, excuse me. I can’t  ignore the pang of jealousy when he mentions
other dates. For once, his arrogant attitude wears on me.
    Who does he think he is? Sex with  me is not  a given because I am not
one of his bimbos. I don’t hand that shit out like Halloween candy.
    “That’s  one of the worst things a first date has ever told me.”
    Another  hand tugs through his hair as he sighs. He may be sharp on the
racetrack, but his people skills suck. I withhold  the temptation to stick  my
tongue out at him because it’ll encourage him more.
    “It  gets cold with the wind.  Take my jacket.” He slides the leather jacket
off his  back and passes it to  me. The moment  I put  it  on, a  smell that’s
distinctly his with a hint of leather surrounds me. It calms me down a teensy
bit.
    “Please do this for me? It’ll  be fun, I promise. If you hate it, I’ll  park the
bike and order us an Uber.”
    His  sincerity does me in. I accept my fate and walk up to the spaceship.
    It’s one date.
    I  sigh. “All  right. Because you asked nicely.”
    He gives me a wicked grin.
    I’m  so screwed.

163
    Five  minutes later, we  speed down one of  Baku’s seaside streets. The
smell of the ocean relaxes me as the city lights blur past us. Lucky for him,
I don’t suffer from motion sickness because this bike hits maximum speeds.
I grip onto Noah’s waist for  dear life as tires tear across the pavement. My
hands accidentally brush up  against his abs, and  I  casually run  a finger
across them, interested in   counting the  ridges.  He  laughs at  my  failed
attempt to be subtle. The rumbling sensation of the motorbike beneath my
ass and touching his abs is turning me on.
    Did  he plan this  on purpose? My body presses up against him and my
arms wrap  around him,  leaving  no  space. Even my  legs  plaster tightly
against his to make sure I  don’t fall  off.  If  it  wasn’t risky,  I’d  wrap them
around him as an extra safety precaution. The whole situation comes across
as intimate despite my bubbling anxiety.
    Everything  feels different with  only Noah and me. No press, no friends,
no distractions. We strip away  all the extra  stuff getting  in the way  of us
spending alone time together.
    He   streams music  through   a  pair  of   speakers, making  the  whole
experience much more enjoyable than I thought. Ocean mist hits my face as
we get closer to the beach, and I love every second of it. I won’t admit it to
his face though because he gets to gloat enough as it is.
    Noah eventually  pulls the bike into  a secluded area by the shore. I hop
off,  anxious to  break our  physical  connection. My  chest tightens  at the
scene in front of us.
    A   couple   of  lanterns  outline   a  picnic   area,  looking  unexpectedly
romantic.
    “Just fun?”  I mumble under my breath, the date not screaming casual to
me.
    “Relax.  Don’t make a big deal out of it.” He grabs my hand and pulls me
toward the colorful blanket.
    I  settle into one of the cushions on the sand. A picnic basket is open off
to the side,  along with  a  bucket with  chilled  wine.  The sound of  waves
crashing against the shore makes the perfect soundtrack.
    A  wave of uneasiness threatens to take away my happiness. Noah’s lips
say casual, but his  actions speak differently. People propose in  less cute
ways. I take a deep breath of the salty ocean air to calm me down, hoping a
few inhales can cure my insecurity about Noah’s intentions.
    “How  did you plan all of this?”

164
    “I  had a little help.” He shoots me a rare shy smile.
    “Right.   Busy life  of  an  F1 driver.”  It  impresses me how  he made an
effort to make sure something nice was planned.
    “We  can pretend for  a night  that none  of that  exists. No  talk of  your
brother and no bringing up Baku. You’re a girl  and I’m  a guy on a normal
date.” He flashes me his usual mischievous smile.
    Did  I  say  he looks like  trouble  already? Still  waiting  on the  warning
label.
    I   agree to   his  terms.  We eat  together,  talking  about  anything  and
everything. He tells me about his favorite  TV  shows and the best cities in
America. I say how I’ve never been there, and he insists I need to go at least
once, offering to show me around and take me to the best food places. I tell
him about my failed attempts at graduating on time, being held back a year
after I  figured  out I  wasn’t  meant to be a  Spanish Elle Woods attending
Harvard.
    “Let’s  play a game.” Noah hits me with a mischievous grin.
    “Seriously?”
    “Dead serious. Ever heard of two truths and a lie?”
    I   roll   my  eyes  with   minimal  effort.   “What   are you,   eighteen and
attending your first college party?”
    Noah lets out a rough laugh. “I never went to college. Entertain me?”
    I  nod because I’d do just about anything with him smiling at me the way
he does.
    “Whoever   loses has  to  chug straight  from   the wine   bottle  for  five
seconds.” His smile reaches his blue eyes as the candlelight flickers across
his skin.
    “Okay,  since this is your bright idea to get me tipsy, you can go first.”
    He chuckles to himself. “I’m   an only child. I  spend thirty minutes a day
watching the news. And I lost my virginity in the back of a pickup truck.”
    I  cough at his last statement, aware of how this game will  go after  one
round.
    “Pickup  truck  is  a lie.  You  look like  a  thousand-thread-count kind of
guy.”
    His  eyes light  up. “Nope. You  got it  wrong. I  hate the news, so I  stay
away from that shit.”
    Well, damn. Guess Noah is an American boy after all, getting down and
dirty in the bed of a truck. I grab the wine bottle and take a chug, holding up

165
a finger for each second that ticks by.
    “Your  turn.” He winks at me.
    “My   brother  announced his Bandini  contract on the  same day as my
graduation. I’ve gotten into five fender benders. I crashed my brother’s first
date.”
    “Five  fender benders? That’s excessive for someone young.”
    I  shake my head and point to the bottle sitting next to us. “Nope. I never
crashed my brother’s first date even though my parents wanted me to. Santi
paid me fifty  euros to watch a different  movie. He got his  hookup while I
got a new pair of shoes.”
    “One,  how  do  you  still  have  a license? And   two,  your  brother told
everyone about his Bandini  deal on  your  special day? How  fucked  up,”
Noah says before  taking  a chug  from  the  bottle I   drank from,  his  lips
wrapped around the same spot mine touched.
    I   shrug. “I   can still  drive  because the officer  felt   bad when  I  cried,
begging me to stop. And Santi couldn’t help the bad timing.”
    “Sometimes  he can be a real dumbass. He could have waited a day at
least.”
    Guilt  runs through me at us talking about Santi this way because I love
my brother. Noah doesn’t care much for him. Stupid to hope they could get
along—for the sake of the team or for me.
    “He  has the best heart. Truly. I can’t get mad at him for more than a day
at most. Not even when he stole all my Barbies and shaved their hair off.”
    “That  should have been the first sign of his instability.”
    A  loud  laugh escapes my mouth. We play a few more rounds with  me
losing a couple times while Noah guesses my lies with ease, surprising me
how he sees through my bullshit. Wine calms my nerves and takes away my
awkwardness. I learn a few things about Noah like  how he skipped senior
prom because of a race, and how he spent seven different Christmases by
himself since his  parents were both  traveling. A  truth  I  guessed as a lie
because who spends the holidays alone?
    We move on from our game. I share the success of my vlog, and how for
the first  time, I  feel  like  I  found my  place. How  I  don’t  worry  as much
anymore about being successful or comparing myself to Santi’s career.
    “What’s  your favorite  part of the vlog?”  He gives me his  full  attention,
his blue eyes wandering over my face.

166
    “Mm,   that’s a tough question. It  originally  started out as a travel vlog,
but now everyone loves how I work with  F1 and Bandini. Fans seem to be
super into it. And  they’re constantly sending me new ideas of things to do
or people to interview.”
    “I  wonder if  I’m  the best part.” His cheeky grin makes me show one of
my own.
    “I  doubt it because people beg for Liam and Jax. Must be their accents.”
    He  scoffs. “It’s tough to  compete with Jax’s British accent. Liam on the
other hand… German tends to lack sexiness.”
    I  shake my head from side to side because Liam sounds fine. “There’s a
reason people like Prince Harry. Or any attractive British guy.”
    “You  find  Jax attractive?” His tight  smile tells me I  didn’t say the right
thing.
    “I   mean, people find him  attractive. But  I went  on a double date with
him and realized he’s not my type.”  I trip  over my own  words, wanting to
put them out there.
    “It  wasn’t a double date because I was there. That makes it automatically
friends hanging out.” His eyes glint in the soft lighting.
    “Liam’s  been asking Sophie for a redo, but she keeps saying no.”
    “We  don’t want that to happen,” his voice rumbles.
    When did he get close to me? Our hands are practically touching.
    “And  why not?” Another breathy sentence from me.
    “Because  I  already called  dibs on  you.”  His  intense gaze makes me
shudder.
    “You  can’t call dibs on people. You sound like a B-list rom-com.”
    “But  I fuck  like an A-list porno.”
    Okay  then. Who says romance is dead? My throat tightens as his eyes
lower, taking me in. He closes the space between us.
    A  hand tugs my  head toward him.  Our lips  meet. But  unlike our  first
kiss, this one demands. Noah takes everything from me all at once, his lips
brushing against mine, intense and irresistible. This somehow beats our first
kiss. We have no one around to stop us,  no interruptions to  pull us  away
from each other this time.
    One of  his hands grips my hair and tugs. The quick  bite of pain makes
me  gasp,  giving   his   tongue  access  to  my   mouth.   It   strokes  mine
possessively, branding me, not giving me a second to overthink  anything.

167
My tongue meets his and strokes back. I want to  taste him and make him
crave me just as much.
    My   fingers run  through his  hair and  he groans when I  grip  the silky
strands. I want to pull him in closer, desperate for what he can give me. My
body hums with approval as he fucks with my brain and heart at once.
    If  this was a movie,  now would be the moment for  cheesy fireworks to
go off in the background.
    My  back hits the blanket and my hands travel across his chest, checking
out the different  muscles. He  doesn’t let  up on  his own  exploration,  his
hands roaming down my body while our tongues stroke one another. I feel
lightheaded from the contact.
    I  moan when he cups my breasts. My nipples brush against the fabric of
my bra, wishing for the barrier to  be gone, another obstacle we don’t need.
My body pushes into his, frantic for more.
    His  mouth leaves mine. Rough fingers find  the hem of  my  shirt at the
same time  his   lips  find   my  neck.  The  nipping,   licking,   and  sucking
sensations drive me crazy. His mouth does wild things to my body. Aroused
doesn’t begin to describe the intense burn inside of me as my breasts grow
heavy with need and my core throbs.
    I  rub myself against his hardened length. My jeans feel rough against my
thong, temporary friction   giving  me some relief.  Fingers clutch  the hard
muscles of his back before my nails scratch against the fabric of his shirt.
    “You’re   going  to  make  me  embarrass myself  if  you  keep  grinding
against my cock,”  he mumbles before returning his  attention to my  neck.
His lips move toward my chest. A new task.
    My  cheeks heat at his disclosure. But it  feels great to make him desire
me because this man makes me feel a whole lot  of things.  The good, the
bad, and the absolute dirtiest.
    “Don’t   get shy on  me now. Fuck that.”  His  lips meet mine  again, this
time with a soft and intimate kiss. I find myself unprepared for any of these
feelings, Noah overwhelming me. Kissing him feels like so much more.
    I  regain consciousness and place both of my hands on his chest, pushing
him softly. He gets the hint and lifts off me.
    “Ah,  your  brain caught up to you. It was fun while  it lasted.”  He rubs a
thumb against my swollen lips.
    “I  don’t do this type of thing.”  My hands gesture between the two of us.

168
    “And   what is that?”  He inches closer again. I  hold up a hand, making
him pause. His lips distract me and make me want to kiss them again. But I
need to get this out before it’s too late.
    “This.   I don’t  do  casual. Random hookups.” Hell  no. Not  after kisses
that set me on fire and make my brain numb.
    He  abandons his seductive mood. His grimace makes me second-guess
my reasoning, and for a brief moment, I’m  afraid about making the wrong
decision. I may  be irresponsible with  other things, but I  need to lock  my
heart up around someone like him. Stay true to my values.
    Noah is the type to unwillingly   chip off  pieces of my armor until I  have
nothing left.  If  his  kisses make me mindless, I  can’t imagine  what other
things with  him will   do to  me. No one told  me how  much it  sucks to be
responsible and honest.
    “Why  not? We can call it quits when the season’s over. No harm done.”
    I  seriously doubt that because I can tell from a couple of kisses that’s not
the case. It hurts to hear him  be cavalier about it,  but it’s  not unexpected
from someone like him.
    His  reaction gives me more strength about my decision.
    “Uh.   I  don’t  think  that’s true.  At  least for  me. I  don’t  want  to catch
feelings for someone who isn’t looking for a relationship. I’m  not that type
of  girl,   a  no-strings-attached person.”  I   clasp  my  hands  on  my   lap,
preventing any fidgeting. I’ve only had a handful of exclusive boyfriends in
my life.
    “Feelings?”  His voice gives away his aversion to the idea.
    Note to self: he’s not a fan of that F word.
    “Yes,  feelings. People like  you leave a trail  of  broken hearts behind. I
don’t want to be one of them, another notch in your damaged bedpost.”
    “I’m   not looking  for  a girlfriend.  I have a crazy schedule and racing is
my life,  so I  can’t  promise you anything  but something sexual. And  that
we’ll  have the  best sex you’ve   ever had in  your  life.  I   can tell  by  our
connection.”
    My  exact worry. Looking at him  weakens my resolve, but I need to stay
strong.
    “I’m    the  type   who  needs  more  than  a  physical  relationship  with
someone. I’m  not the  booze-and-banging type you  usually  hang around
with. I can’t change who I am to be what you want.”

169
    “You’re  really going to  deny yourself this?” His reaction shows me how
no one denies him. Evidence of his messed-up childhood, the ultimate only-
child syndrome shining through.  He trails  a finger down  my neck toward
my  chest. I   gasp at  the  scorching  sensation his  finger  leaves  behind,
unhappy how my body becomes aware of his touch instantaneously. It’s a
shame to deny what my body craves.
    “Yes.”  My  panting voice doesn’t exude the firmness I need it to. I  swat
his hands away, ending his spell.
    “We  can stay friends. Not  the benefits kind  though, but  I’ll  avoid  you
less.” I nod, convincing  myself that  this is the right  decision. My  honesty
about avoiding him feels like progress.
    “Right.”   His blank expression fills me with dread. Am I making the right
decision?
    Our  dinner went well. Comfortable and easy, something that feels like it
can be much more than a casual fling. But people like him don’t fall in love.
I  don’t  need to open  myself  up to  potential  misery with  someone from
Bandini.
    Noah gets up and reaches out for my hand. My skin warms at his touch.
Yup. I absolutely made the right choice because this is a one-way ticket to
heartache. We walk through the sand toward his motorbike. I look back at
the picnic area, my heart tightening at the abandoned sight of it. Despite the
less than ideal ending, this was one of the best dates I’ve ever been on and
I’ll  always remember it.
    I  put on the helmet and his jacket without a fight, a chill running through
me at this ending. The smell of him is intoxicating and unfair like it’s wrong
to breathe in.
    Noah  stays  quiet  as  he gets  on  the  bike,  his  mind  drifting   off   to
somewhere else, erecting a wall between us. I don’t give  him a hard time
getting on. He starts up the engine, and we take off back toward the hotel.
The ride feels shorter as if Noah’s desperate to get us back. I don’t take it
personally.
    He   drops  me  off   in  the  parking   garage shortly   after,  pulling   the
motorbike up to the elevator like a gentleman.
    “If   it  were another life,  I’d  probably do  right by  you. I’d   take you on
dates and try harder. But that’s not who I  am or how  I was raised. I don’t
know how to be the kind of emotional guy you desire.”

170
    My   eyes  water, clouding   my  vision.  Everything   feels  final.  We’ve
circled one another for three months, and now it’s over, gone in the blink of
an eye. I respect him for sharing and being honest about who he is.
    “Thank   you  for  a  great date. It’ll    be a  hard  one to  top,  even  with
everything.” I sneakily inhale one last breath of his jacket before passing it
back to him.
    “Likewise.”   His cocky grin doesn’t exactly reach his eyes.
    “I  better get going. Santi will be wondering where I went for so long.”
    He presses the button. “Yeah, sure.” His arms pull me in for a hug while
his lips brush softly against mine, giving me a goodbye kiss that should be
reserved for lovers—intimate, kind, and packed with unspoken words. My
heart perks up before he pulls away.
    Elevator doors open, the empty car a welcoming sight. I walk in and turn
around.
    “Bye,  Noah. See you tomorrow.”
    His  intense gaze is the last thing I see before the doors close.

171
20

172
                                                    Noah






The first thing I feel when I wake up is the pulsing of my head.
    The second thing I feel is a hand crawling up my chest.
    The third thing  I feel is intense regret.
    Fuck. Please tell me it’s Maya’s hand.
    I   look  down  at long,  red  nails.  Maya’s  don’t  look  like  these talons
scratching at my  chest, preferring natural  nail  colors. These hands are a
symbol of  my past. Nausea crawls up  my throat  as I lean my  head back
down on a pillow.
    I  comb through the memories of last night,  of how I  took Maya  out on
the date I  planned.  Never thought  I  could  have such a  good time  with
someone while  doing   absolutely  nothing  except  eating,  drinking,   and
kissing.
    The date was my favorite, at least out of my short list.
    And  the erotic way Maya kisses. Fuck me. Kissing her feels like I did it
wrong with all the women before her.
    But  what  the fuck  happened after? I struggle to  remember what I  did
once she pulled the  stops on me.  Images flash of  her rejecting  me with
sadness in her eyes, knowing I can’t give her what she needs. The ultimate
blow still feels fresh based on the way my chest constricts at the thought.
    Memories   hit   me  all   at  once,  flooding   my   brain  with   unwanted
recollections. Lots  of  shots. Liam  and  Jax at  a club,  groups of  women
coming onto us at our VIP table. It feels like I  went back to a time before I
met Maya.
    Shit. My  crappy decisions proved Maya’s point of not being the type of
guy she wants to date. Not in the slightest. I sure as fuck wouldn’t want to
date someone like me.
    My  back lifts off  of the mattress and a blonde girl topples off me.
    “You  need to go.  Now,”  my voice  rasps. Another reminder of my  bad
decisions, along with my dry mouth and aversion to sunlight.
    I  don’t  want to  spend another moment with this  woman, the look  and
feel of  her all wrong.  Her rose scent, mixed in  with  the smell of  sex and

173
booze, chokes me, incomparable to Maya’s fresh one. My stomach rolls at
the thought of how badly I fucked up.
    I  head to  the bathroom,  choosing to  brush my  teeth first,  wanting  to
cleanse my mouth from the taste of that woman and alcohol. My  battered-
up face makes me wince. Disgust rolls through me at my sunken eyes and
pale, sickly skin.
    I  take a shower, eager to rid myself of the woman’s smell and everything
else associated with her and a bad ending to my night. By the time I get out,
there’s no sign of  her, except for  the underwear she left on  a pillow.  My
body shudders as I dump her souvenir in the trash.
    I  pull my  phone from the plug, glad I remembered to charge my battery.
At  least I made one responsible decision because, overall, I’m  a  fucking
idiot.
    Are you shitting me? I didn’t set my alarm, missing my practice sessions.
    Shit. Shit. Shit!
    I  bolt out of my hotel room, desperate to make it to my qualifier on time.
    I’ve  never been so damn irresponsible in my life.





It doesn’t shock me when my day goes from bad to the fucking worst.  My
qualifier starts out as a shitshow. I rush to  get my race suit on and chug a
gallon of water to make sure I don’t pass out behind the wheel under the hot
conditions. Sophie’s dad looks pissed as fuck about my tardiness, glaring at
me as I swallow down a granola bar.
    He fails  to hide his distaste. “You look like  shit. You’re not a young kid
anymore, staying up late to party. I expect this from  anyone but you.” His
sneer tells me everything.  James Mitchell  isn’t  one to  fuck  around with
because he has balls bigger than King Kong. His green eyes stare down at
me while he runs an agitated hand across his face. His gray hair remains in
place, unlike mine standing up  in different  directions, the waves untamed
from my hands.
    “I’m   extremely sorry;  this will  never happen again.” No  apologies can
erase my terrible decisions.
    I  trip over  my feet while rushing to  my car. I’m  a hot, crappy mess and
fuck if  it isn’t  humbling. Embarrassed doesn’t begin to describe how I feel.

174
Bandini mechanics look down at me, unsure how to help, as I clamber into
my car. Sweat clings to my chest before the engine starts up, a shitty omen
for my fuck-tastic day.
    The beginning of  my qualifier  goes okay as my car takes down the first
straightaway. That is until I  make it  past my first  turn. Bile  creeps up my
throat during most of the turns after, the curves of the track not faring well
with the alcohol  seeping from my pores. I spend all  my mental energy on
not blowing chunks inside my helmet because I’d never live that down.
    My  nasty hangover doesn’t pair nicely  with my  car going two  hundred
miles an  hour  round and  round the  track.  The qualifier   performance is
sloppy and unprofessional. The usual hum of the engine fills me with dread,
guilt eating away at me as I think about Maya and how she might feel if she
heard about my night.
    Sweat trickles down my  back, soaking the material of my fireproof gear
as I  careen across the track. Fans watch  the worst  display of  my  entire
racing career.
    I  rush out of my car once the qualifier finishes. My  body revolts against
me as I throw up twice near a patch of grass close to the pit area, the acidic
taste making me nauseous all over again. All of this happens while a local
camera crew films me. Somehow, I find enough self-control to not flip them
off, instead choosing to give a thumbs up to the camera while I hunch over.
    My  car places fourteenth for the race. Fucking fourteenth. I haven’t had
such an embarrassing placement since I started out in F1, and I don’t know
if I’ll  live  this one down.
    The  only  small blessing from  today is  how I  don’t  have to attend the
press conference meant exclusively for the top three racers. I guess sucking
comes with benefits.
    Since Santi has the pole position, he’ll be distracted. I need to find Maya
and apologize for everything. Like for taking  her out on a date and fucking
another girl in the same day. Even if she’s disinterested in hooking up with
me, it’s wrong.
    I  spot Sophie and Maya talking with Liam and Jax on the main road near
all the hospitality  suites. A cold feeling  creeps its way up my  spine at the
sight of Jax pulling her in  for a hug. It shouldn’t  upset me but shit it stings
to see her wrapping her arms around him and laughing, unaware of how he
got a blowjob at the table last night from a random chick.

175
    I  don’t have a right to feel jealous since I can’t give her what she wants.
But I  can’t control  it;  my fists  clench at the sight  of them, envy  whirling
inside of me like toxic air.
    Maya’s  eyes catch mine. The smile she had before slips from her face,
and it pisses me off how I’ve turned her mood sour in two seconds flat.
    I  stroll  up to  the guys, keeping  it casual even though I  barely  have it
together inside.
    “Shit  luck  today, bro.” Liam  doesn’t look the least bit  phased from last
night. Was I the only one who got seriously fucked up? Come to think of it,
he was sober as hell. I don’t  even think he blinked  at any other girls  who
came onto us. Shit.
    “Never  going out  the night before a qualifier  again. That was a terrible
idea, man.” Jax pats my shoulder as he throws me under the bus.
    Fuck you very much, Jax.
    “You   guys look  like   you had  quite  the night.  Ballsy  move  before a
qualifier.” Sophie’s narrowed eyes glare into mine.
    “Mm,  that’s why  my brother is the best. He puts the team first.” Maya’s
polite smile doesn’t reach her flat eyes.
    “Yeah, yeah, we get it already. You adore Santiago. At least pretend you
want us to do well too.” Liam knocks Maya’s hat off her head and offers her
a shrug. She laughs at him. I want to record the sound for the bad days, like
today, because I’m the biggest idiot.
    “We   better get  going.  Girls’   day and  all.”   Sophie links  her  arm  in
Maya’s. They head off after saying their goodbyes with Maya ignoring me.
It fucking sucks.
    “Bro,  you got smashed last night. You wouldn’t shut up about her.” Liam
nods his head in the direction Maya left in.
    Jax shakes his head. “It  was a sad sight until  you took  that girl  home.
You even called  her Maya  once, but  she shrugged it off.  What  was her
name? Beatrice?”
    Thank you, Jax, for bringing up the last thing I want to think about. I flip
him off.
    “She  was  hot.  You always  get  the good  ladies.”  Liam’s  arms  cross
against his chest.
    “I’m   surprised she even  went home with   him. He  kept  talking about
Maya  rejecting  him,  how  she  doesn’t  want  a  playboy  like  him.”   Jax
chuckles to himself.

176
    “Okay,  guys, I  get  it. It  was  a pathetic night.  Can we not  bring  it  up
anymore? Like ever.” My clipped voice matches my declining patience.
    “All    right.  No  need to  get  pissy at  us.”  Liam’s  last  words end  that
conversation.
    I  take  off  in  the direction  of  the Bandini  motorhome  because I have
another round of apologies to get out to Sophie’s dad and the pit crew.





Unlike the last time Maya avoided me, we both keep our distance this time.
Me because of  shame. Her probably  because I gross her out,  not  that I
blame her at all.
    The rest of  Saturday is uneventful, which fills  me with  relief.  I recover
from my awful hangover, trying to overhydrate because race-day conditions
are hot and alcohol dehydrates like no other. No doubt I’ll  sweat out three
pounds of body weight at least.
    On   race  day,  I   eavesdrop on   Santiago  and  Maya’s   conversation,
desperate to feel close to her. She keeps her voice low  and inaudible. To
avoid punching a wall out of frustration, I exit my suite to go to the pit area.
    I   run  through  some  engine  checks and  attend  a  pre-race briefing.
Busying myself keeps me from doing something stupid, like  finding Maya
and giving into her demands while begging for forgiveness. After wrapping
up with the top engineers, I head back toward the garage.
    I  silently curse at Maya sitting next to  the computer bay. She wears one
of the  engineer’s headsets so she can listen in  on  Santi’s team radio.  A
churning feeling of jealousy swirls in  the pit of  my stomach. Being jealous
of her brother…a new low.
    A  lot  of contradictory feelings mix  inside of my  head. Maya rejects me
because she wants more than I can give her, but I don’t even know how to
try to give her what she wants.
    Her  vlog camera swings around in full  force, filming  the busy race-day
activities.
    I  find  it difficult   to ignore her voice while  I  discuss the logistics of the
car and  any  last-minute  tune-ups.  She tours  the  place  and  introduces
members of the team, a sweet gesture to show off the men and women who
are essential  to  Bandini.  Her   voice  raves about  how   the  crew  keeps

177
everything up and running,  even introducing them  by name, proof  of her
connection to the team. She has this way of charming  people. Unlike me,
who has a way of fucking up with people.
    I  try to hide my shock when she walks up to my car.
    “Here  we have Slade’s team.”
    I  see we are back to last names now.
    She does a spin to get everyone in the camera shot. “They’re busy doing
last-minute checks on his car. He has a big task of catching up to Santiago,
Liam, and Jax since he starts in P14 today. It’s his worst start since he began
racing in F1. Better luck next time.”
    Thanks, Maya. I take it because I deserve it and more.
    I  wave at the camera as she pans over my car. Her fruity shampoo hits
my senses, instantly bringing me back to the other night. Her lips on mine,
the sounds she made when I touched her, when I grinded into her. My dick
twitches in my race suit. Great.
    She moves on to interview  one of the head engineers. He subtly checks
out Maya’s chest in between questions, and it takes everything in me not to
push him away.
    Concentrate on  your car.  You’re about to go  race and you  don’t have
time to worry about her.
    I  decide to ignore Maya for  the rest of the prep. No  need for any more
distractions, least  of  all  from   her  since she  decided she  doesn’t  want
anything casual. She rejected me. Her loss.





I lose the race big  time. But  I worked  my ass off to  get out of  fourteenth
position, and considering where I  started, I’m  happy with  placing  eighth.
Santi and I even get points for the Constructors.
    I  head to  my suite, not  wanting  to check out  the podium celebrations
today despite being glad for Jax and Liam. Santiago, too, I guess. But it was
a good day for McCoy, which means a bad one for Bandini.
    Maya sits out on the empty balcony of the hospitality area, lying across a
couch, cellphone in hand. I like to head up here when I have a bad day, but
it looks like she beat me to it.

178
    “Was  she worth it?”  She baits me, not glancing up  from her cellphone
screen. My irritability grows with  every second she refuses to look at me.
    “Who?”   I   play  stupid  because I  don’t   want  to  deal  with   this  shit
anymore. We aren’t boyfriend and girlfriend.
    “The  floozie from last night.”
    My  lips twitch  up at her word choice. “Oh, her.” That gets her to look up
at me. I don’t  like her stormy gaze, the way she comes off indifferent  to a
situation that bothers the fuck out of her. I’d rather have her mad at me than
feel nothing at all.
    I  meant it when I said I’m a selfish bastard.
    “Yup.”  Her lips pop on the last letter.
    “She  was a decent lay.” I  shrug, coming off  uncaring, even though my
throat feels like I swallowed glass. It feels wrong to lie  like this, my  words
hurting her because I take my anger on myself out on her.
    “Mm.   Wonder how much alcohol you had to  drink to  wipe the taste of
me from your  mouth. Doubt  the girl  minded, though. Desperation always
trumps common sense.”
    Fuck. She has me there. I’m stunned stupid, unable to get any words out.
    “They’ll   never be as good as what we could have. But this is why people
like you never have happily-ever-afters. You’re so jaded, you can’t see the
best things until it’s too late.”
    She gets up,  not bothering to  give me  one last look  as she leaves the
balcony.
    My  stomach drops at not being worth a backward glance.

179
21

180
                                                    Maya






I  avoid  everything Noah-related  for  weeks. Anytime   I  find  him  in   the
Bandini suites, I walk the other way. Things sit heavy between us. And not
in the “hot  and heavy”  kind  of way,  much more like  the “my  heart hurts
whenever I see him” kind of way.
    How  I  feel about him is messy. It doesn’t fit  nicely  into checked boxes
or a pros and cons list.  I  struggle to understand my conflicting  emotions,
which ends up pissing me off more. Part of me wishes he could commit to
trying  a real  relationship while  another part  of  me thinks  he’s not  even
worth the trouble.
    He  should have waited at least a day before hooking up  with someone
else. It’s basically common courtesy.
    How  do  you  fuck  another woman  right  after you  go  on a  date with
someone else? It’s cold and disgusting. I honestly didn’t  expect that from
him.
    Every  time I run  into Noah, I feign  indifference, choosing to ignore the
way my heart beats faster around him. Or how my body heats when his eyes
roam over me, or  the hint  of sadness that crosses his face when I ignore
him.
    I  thrust  myself  into taking  my  vlog  to the  next level.  Seven hundred
thousand subscribers tune in to my vlogs already, and the ads on my videos
turn a nice profit. Sponsors reach out to partner with me, something I never
thought was possible. The vlog has surpassed everything I’d ever dreamed
of. Sophie and I visit different places in every city we travel  to, making the
most of my time with Bandini  while the explorations conveniently keep me
away from Noah.
    The month-long  summer break between the first and second half of the
season couldn’t have come at a better time. I try to lie  to myself and say I
don’t miss Noah over the vacation. But  I  do. I check out his  social media
accounts daily, except he keeps quiet,  not posting anything  but  a couple
pictures of the Italian coast. Even gossip accounts have nothing to report on
him. He’s  taken a break  from  everything. And  maybe it’s  a  good thing,
seeing as his previous indiscretions finally cycled out of the media.

181
    I   spend the  vacation  with   my  family,   including  Santi.  Besides the
temporary bouts of missing Noah, I have a good time.
    Sophie comes to Spain to visit us during the last week of the break. My
parents welcome her like a second daughter, sharing how grateful they are
for me to have someone to spend time with besides Santi.
    Sophie and I come up with the best plan. A talent of hers.
    “Repeat  the plan back to  me. I  want to  make sure you’re convinced.”
Sophie paints her nails in my bedroom. Tomorrow, we both fly  together to
the next  race because she wants to  prep me  before seeing Noah  at the
Belgian Grand Prix.
    I   jokingly  roll   my  eyes even though  I  appreciate her friendship  and
dedication to making sure I keep out of trouble.
    “All   right. Since I’m  now a mature woman who knows better, I’m going
to be civil and nice. I don’t need to play games with him. We are two adults
who can get along for the sake of the team.”
    Sophie smiles up at the quote she makes me repeat every time I bring up
Noah. “And…”  She waves her hand expectantly.
    “I  will  not give in.”
    “In  to what exactly? I need to hear you say it.”
    Ugh, she actually wants me to repeat it.
    “I   will   not  fall   for   his  rough yet  sweet  personality, rock-hard  abs,
kissable lips, or fuckable body.” My new go-to chant.
    Her  green eyes sparkle. “Atta girl. I’m  so proud. Look how quickly  you
grew in  a  month.  Vacation glow  looks  good on  you.”   She pinches my
cheeks.
    “Why  does this feel like it’s going to be a disaster?”
    “Stop  your  catastrophizing. You’re  going to  give yourself  a migraine.
What’s the goal for  the second half of the season? Maybe we need to run
through it one more time.”
    She’s so full of it. But  I give in because she flashes me two dimples.
    “Grow   my vlog,  find  a nice man to go  on a couple of  dates with, and
spend time with my best friend.”
    Sophie  claps her  hands like  I’m  a  child  saying  my first   words. The
display comes off dramatic and silly, but it fits her.
    “Yes, girl.  Cheers to that!” We clink our glasses and sip our wine.
    The cold liquid  soothes my throat. “Where does one find nice men in F1
anyway? I’m curious.”

182
    “Leave  that up to me. I’m your fairy  godmother but instead of waving a
magic wand, I  use a magic dildo.  Works like  a charm. It’s  guaranteed to
land you the best dick you’ve ever had.”
    Wine nearly streams out of my nose.
    Not sure what I volunteered myself for, but I can’t help feeling worried.

183
22

184
                                                    Noah






I regret how I went about everything in  Baku, including how my  anger got
the best of me after the race, making stupid statements to Maya. I messed
up big time with her. But I want to fix it and make things right.
    I  spend a good portion  of  the break working  out kinks  in  my car  and
strategizing with the team for the second half of the Championship season.
    But  I also spend time going to therapy.
    Yup. Let that sink in for a second. Me in therapy.
    I   sit  in  my  psychologist’s  office,   attending one  of  my  two   weekly
sessions. One session per week wouldn’t  cut  it  because I need to  work
through a ton of  shit about my  parents, relationships, and my issues with
commitment. And I don’t have a lot of time before the next race.
    The whole  process has been a lot to take in. Some days I leave sessions
pissed off  while  other times  I  leave sad because of  how fucked  up  my
parents are  and the  damage they’ve   caused. Therapy  is  an  emotional
struggle that drains me worse than driving one-hundred laps around a Prix
track.
    “What   holds you  back  from  wanting  a relationship?”  My   therapist’s
brown eyes gaze at me from across the room as he sits casually in his beige
chair. I sit  on a leather couch, switching between staring up at the  ceiling
and meeting his gaze.
    “I’m   not sure. It’s kind  of a mixture of  different things. I’ve  never even
tried to have a real girlfriend before.”
    “Walk  me through the combination of reasons.” His hands clasp together
across his knee. He looks put together with his gray hair combed over and
his pressed suit.
    “I   don’t  even know  what  a good  relationship looks  like.  My  parents
didn’t  love  each other. I  was a credit  line  at  Barney’s for  my  mom, an
endless tie to my dad’s bank account. So I’m not sure what real love even
looks or feels like.  That’s a scary thought  in itself.”  How  can I  recognize
something I have no clue about?
    “If   you could describe love to me, what would you  say?” His questions
never let me  off  easy. No, I  consider them  shit-stirring  instead of  open-

185
ended.
    “Hmm.”   I rub the back of my neck. “I  think love is about happiness and
sacrifice. Compromising instead of arguing. Having someone who is always
there for you even when you don’t deserve it. Loving  someone means you
want to spend the rest of your life with them, on the good days and the bad
days and everything in between.”
    He  looks proud of  what I said, nodding along  with me and hanging on
each word. A  small  ounce of  pride rushes through me  at my  thoughtful
answer.
    “Those  are  all  great ideas  of  love.  And  what  would  be the  reasons
holding you back from trying with  someone? Let’s use Maya as an example
since you bring her up during our sessions.”
    I  sit and think  about his question for a full  minute. He doesn’t push me
when I stay quiet, instead preferring to wait it  out, putting less pressure on
me to fill the silence.
    “I   think  I’m   afraid.”  Words leave  my lips  in  a  whisper. I  don’t  like
admitting fear about anything when I drive cars faster than any other man in
the world for fuck’s sake.
    “Fear is not always a weakness. It’s what you do with the fear that shows
your true strength. What exactly are you afraid of?” This man and his board
of inspirational quotes.
    “Not  giving  it my best and failing. Disappointing  her and not being able
to be there when she needs me. Breaking her heart and mine in the process.
The thought  of  giving  someone power over  me…”  I   look  down at  my
hands. Rough fingertips press together in a fidgeting  motion that reminds
me of Maya. Ever since Baku, thinking about her makes my chest constrict
weirdly like it  recognizes how much of a dumbass I am.
    “Those are all reasons anyone would be afraid and worried about trying.
You’re not alone in thinking that. A  lot of people share similar reservations
when  they   start  a  relationship   because loving   someone  makes  you
vulnerable.”
    I  didn’t know that.
    “How   would you  feel if  Maya  dated another person who is willing   to
love her like you described earlier?”
    I  clench my hands. The thought of her dating, kissing, or fucking another
guy makes me sick. I don’t deserve her, but screw anyone else who tries.
    “I  wouldn’t  like it one fucking bit.”

186
    “And  why  is that?” He doesn’t flinch  at my cursing, further evidence of
why I like this man.
    “Because I’ll  be wishing it was me who could do those things with her.”
    My   admission sits with   us like  a third   person. Minutes pass by  as I
devise a plan, the sound of the clock ticking to the rhythm of my  bouncing
leg.
    “I   think I  have an idea for  what I  need to do.  But I  want to  run it  by
you.”
    My  therapist smiles  at me. He helps me  build confidence, listening  to
my ideas while offering insight and opposing viewpoints. I’m  fucking done
sitting on the sidelines thinking about my mistakes, because I’m the type to
be on the front of the grid with a pole-position start.
    Time to get my trophy.

187
23

188
                                                    Maya






“Listen, the last date was bad, but this one will  be better. I pinky  promise.
We can ditch  together if  it  goes terrible.”  Sophie  holds my  hand before
linking our pinkies together, forcing a promise on me before I agree.
    I  groan. Another date sounds like a terrible idea. “The last one included
a guy bringing out photos of his family  and ex-wife. He even told me how
they got  married and divorced,  tearing up  as the waiter  brought out  our
dessert. I’ll never look at tiramisu the same way again.”
    “Okay,  I  get it. That  wasn’t my best work.  I’m  still  fixing  the kinks  in
my magic wand  dildo  thing. But  I  picked two  good ones this time.”  Her
green eyes fill with hope.
    “That  sounds so wrong. Who are the new guys?”
    Since we both  can suffer together, I give in to  the plan. I don’t  want to
risk it with  another disastrous date because a woman can only take so many
photo albums.
    “They’re   two  top engineers for McCoy.  I  met one  of them  at a press
conference my dad was talking in. They’re sweet, I swear. Cross my heart.”
She drags her index finger in an X motion.
    I  nod along, agreeing to the plan because of Sophie’s good intentions.
    “Yay.  You won’t  regret it!   They even got us reservations at the nicest
restaurant in Milan. Because nothing says a good date like pasta!” She claps
her hands and drags us to my hotel room to pick our outfits.  For someone
who loves sneakers and T-shirts, she sure enjoys getting dressed up.
    Here we  are on a date the night before a qualifier  round, sitting  across
from two  good-looking  guys. Sophie shoots me a grin when  they look  at
their menus.
    I  agreed to this date for her because she’s seemed to struggle with Liam
ever since they went to Canada. Not that she opens up about it.
    The  man Sophie set me up with has a head of blonde hair that curls  at
the ends. He looks kind of cute in a sweet way, and he even has a hint of an
accent I can’t place. Candlelight dances off his brown eyes as he stares into
mine.

189
    “What’s  it like  to be a vlogger for Bandini? At McCoy  we always watch
them, hoping you’ll drop trade secrets.” My date, Daniel, smiles wide.
    I  shake my head. “I’m careful  to make sure that doesn’t happen. I think
they would flag  my  videos and not allow  me to film  anymore.”  I make a
zipping  motion  with  my   fingers  and throw   the invisible   key  over  my
shoulder.
    “Which  videos have you seen?” Sophie jumps in, her blonde space buns
bobbing.
    “We  watch a  lot of  them and they look  pretty  well  done. Do you  edit
them yourself?” Her date, John, asks.
    “I’ve   learned how to edit better as I continue to make more videos. I’m
sure I could upgrade my equipment once it takes off because nice cameras
are worth thousands of dollars.”
    “By  taking  off, she means more than a million followers. She’s close to
800,000 already.” Sophie beams like a proud mom.
    “How   much  did  you  pay  Noah  to  do  those videos?  Especially  the
question ones because he never does stuff like that. He even declined Sports
Daily when they asked for a similar one.”
    My  eyes burn at the memory. Nothing like bringing up Noah to dampen
my mood, except my date has no idea about Noah and me, let alone how the
industry works.
    “I  paid him nothing since he volunteered, and I didn’t exactly strong-arm
him into  it.  Plus, we  don’t  really pay  for  things like  that in  this  kind  of
work. Famous people usually do it  if  they want to.  If  not, they say no.”  I
scrunch my nose at Daniel’s misunderstanding.
    “Doubt   anyone could say no to  you,  not even the great Noah  Slade.”
Daniel’s smile doesn’t fill   me with warmth  like Noah’s did.  I give  a weak
smile back, not exactly enjoying how he brings up Noah and Bandini.
    Sophie gives  my knee a squeeze under the table, finding  the perfectly
painful pressure point. I  force  the idea of  him  out of  my  head. Her new
project includes conditioning  me  into not  thinking  about Noah  anymore,
going as far as watching videos on Pavlov’s dog.
    “Excuse  me, I’ll  be right  back. I  need to use the restroom.” I push my
chair out  with  more force  than I’d   intended. It  knocks into  the  back of
another person’s seat, causing the occupant to glare at me.
    “I’m   so sorry.” I  speed walk out of there and dart into the dark hallway
near the bathrooms.

190
    I   pull  out my  phone  to distract  myself  while  keeping  track of  time.
Scrolling through Instagram’s feed comforts me.
    The screen shuts off.
    I  breathe in a smell that’s distinctly Noah.
    Oh God, why does my luck suck so bad lately?
    “Date  going that terrible?” His  hoarse voice grabs my attention, and my
heart rate picks up. Calloused fingers lift my chin, making my body respond
to him instantaneously like we haven’t spent a month apart. Poor lighting in
the hall  doesn’t give  me much to  look  at. I  breathe in  the smell  of  him
because I’m a glutton for punishment. His textured thumb drags across my
lips.
    “What  are you doing  here?” Did my voice sound husky? I can’t  hear it
over the blood rushing through my ears.
    “I’m   out at dinner with friends. It’s a popular restaurant.”
    Okay,  so at  least he doesn’t  follow   me around. That  would  be a  bit
concerning.
    Noah’s dark silhouette blocks any light, making it difficult  to distinguish
his features in the dim hall. His lips brush against mine. My lips tingle from
the barest touch, a mere caress I feel guilty enjoying. I  tilt my  neck to the
side to evade his lips.
    He  chuckles. His lips  trail  down my  neck instead, leaving light  kisses
behind.
    “I’ve   missed you.” The three words he says feel like  everything I want
to hear. They make my heart ache because he can’t give me what I want, no
matter how much I crave it.
    “You  can’t miss what you’ve never had.” If  I wasn’t currently occupied,
I’d clap myself on the back for that one.
    “What  if  I  told you I’ve  changed, that the break did us good?” He gets
the words out before his lips suck on my neck, what I deem to be my weak
spot. Our chemistry has not wavered. It feels as charged as ever; as his lips
drag across my skin, my body unconsciously arches into him.
    The betrayal.
    “Not  sure if I believe you. Actions speak louder than words.”
    Trashy  tabloids have kept quiet  since the blonde woman  in Baku.  He
may speak the truth, but I don’t want to chance it, putting myself  out there
to get hurt.
    “Let  me show you. Just give me a real chance.”

191
    His  lips find  mine again. But this  time his kiss domineers the situation,
just like  him, crashing against me and tearing down my walls.  His tongue
strokes the seam of my lips, seeking entrance.
    I  keep them sealed off, preventing him from  taking the kiss further. He
nips at my bottom lip in a silent demand for me to open up to him. His teeth
graze and pull, causing me to groan at the feeling.
    “Uh.  Oh man, I’ll  come back later.”
    My  head snaps up at the stranger’s voice.  I bury  my face  into Noah’s
button-down shirt, which  is a bad idea because the addicting smell of him
makes me lightheaded.
    I  don’t move until the stranger’s footsteps disappear.
    “Hear  me out. Let me expla—” his voice croaks.
    Nope. Need to get out of this situation ASAP.
    “Um.  Uh…I  have to go.” I take off in the direction of my table, leaving a
grumbling Noah behind me, not bothering to steal a second glance at him.
My brain  tells me to  run away from  Noah while  my body tells  me to run
toward him.
    Sophie’s eyes narrow at me when  I settle back in  my seat, making me
feel even worse about what happened.
    I  ignore her side glances throughout the night because we can have story
time later.





My stomach twists in  knots as Sophie stares at me from across the room,
her sneaker tapping against the carpet. She reads my body language while
she sits on the sectional couch in Santi’s suite. My eyes gaze around at the
plain  hotel  room  in  a struggle  to  find   anything interesting  to  look  at.
Basically, anything but her face would do.
    “What  did we say about him?” She won’t let me off easy, her voice laced
with disappointment.
    “Well,  I  didn’t  exactly fall  for his  rough yet sweet personality, kissable
lips,  fuckable body,  or  rock-hard abs.  Honestly, he  cornered me  in  the
hallway.  I  didn’t   even  know  he  was  there.  It’s  not   like  I   chose the
restaurant.” I  may or  may  not  have practiced that  line  in  the bathroom
earlier.

192
    “And  what, he tripped and his lips  fell on yours?” She waves her hands
around. Yup. Definitely ticked off.  My  silence doesn’t bode well  with  her
because she paces the room, agitated and grumbling about how all her plans
fail.
    “Don’t   you dare try to play it off  in your pretty head. That’s a ridiculous
idea. You came back  to the  table a  mess and your lips  looked  like  you
sucked his dick in  the bathroom. Did you? Or  did he suck on them like  a
Hoover vacuum?”
    I  have no clue how  she says the most ridiculous things as seriously as
she does, not even cracking a smile.
    My  chest and face feel fifty shades of pink. I dramatically  throw myself
face first onto the couch in front  of us, grabbing a pillow  to drone her out.
She means well and all, but it doesn’t make it easier.
    “I’m   sorry. I  won’t  do it  again. I learned my  lesson.” Cushions muffle
my voice.
    “I   sure hope so. Daniel is  a nice guy  who’s hesitant about giving  you
another chance.” She plucks  the pillow   from  my face  and stares at me,
green eyes glittering under the dim lighting.
    “You  talked to him about it?” I cringe at my whininess.
    She shakes her head. “Not exactly.  But I  can read these things. Call it
intuition.”
    “Next  one will  go  better. Maybe we shouldn’t go somewhere public.” I
get her hopes up, pretending to agree to another date I have no intention of
following  through on. No need to lead a poor guy on when my mind  is on
someone else.
    “I   don’t think  it’ll  happen because we are engaging in stage two of the
plan.”
    Sophie’s second phase fills me with uncertainty.
    I  glance up  from  my  pity  corner on the  couch. She taps away at  her
phone, ignoring me.
    “I’m   bringing  in  reinforcements.”  Tap. Tap. Tap. Her  fingers  moving
against her phone fills the quiet.
    “Should  I be worried?”
    She shoots me a mischievous smile.
    Well, that answers my question.

193
24

194
                                                    Noah






I try  to pinpoint  the exact moment my friends  started ditching me. Was it
after Germany? Or France?
    I  can’t exactly  place it, but ever since the summer break, I barely hang
with Liam  and Jax. Every  week, they come up  with  excuses about being
busy. By the  time we  show up  in  Singapore for the  Grand Prix,  they’re
nowhere to be found. Yet again.
    The  only time  I see them is during  a press conference after Saturday’s
qualifier. I   ended up driving  well   and have pole  position  for  tomorrow,
securing the best spot at one of the few night races we have. At least things
with racing look promising.
    Do   they  not  want  to  hang out  with   me because I   win  a  lot?  The
Championship gets competitive after all. Maybe they keep their distance for
the brand’s sake since teams don’t encourage us to hang out and play nice.
But when I think  back on times in the past, they never got this way, which
means it has to be something else.
    I  hang out all alone in my hotel room, overlooking the city, checking out
the view of  the famous trees and Marina Bay  Sands buildings. Singapore
bustles with activity  before  the race. People flood the  sidewalks, looking
like ants from my suite’s balcony.
    Despite all the action, for the first time, I feel lonely.
    I’m  putting it  out there. My therapist would be proud.
    I  sit on the couch for a few minutes, processing what it feels like to have
no one around.  My  friends  rarely respond to  my  messages. We haven’t
planned a night out, a strange occurrence for them in the biggest party city
on the Prix schedule.
    Even Maya avoids me ever since I kissed her in the Milan restaurant two
weeks ago. She sticks to  Santi’s side like  a stage-five  clinger, playing  it
smart because I’d never do anything in front of him. But she won’t give me
a chance to explain myself either. I  want to  tell her  I’m  ready to try  with
her, the whole deal, no more fucking around.
    I  can’t  stand how she evades me. So I do  what usually calms me  and
drones out the thoughts in my head. I pull up Maya’s vlog on my laptop and

195
click yesterday’s upload. My  heart drops at her stunning smile, her brown
eyes staring into the camera with happiness as she holds a lens to her face.
    “Hi,   everyone, welcome back. This week we  are in Singapore and it’s
honestly  one  of   the   coolest  cities  we’ve   visited   so  far   during   the
Championship. I’m here with Sophie, Jax, and Liam.”
    Now  I have my answer about my friends’ whereabouts. My teeth clench
at the sight of them all  smiling into  Maya’s camera like they didn’t  ignore
my two texts to hang out.
    “We’re  here at the Gardens by the Bay. Viewers asked for a Web’s Most
Asked Questions with Jax, Britain’s  favorite playboy. Liam  decided to tag
along because he has a serious case of FOMO.”
    You’re not the only one, buddy.
    “We  decided to do a combination deal here. It’s the best of both worlds. I
asked viewers what  their most  pressing questions were about  these two
clowns. I wrote down the top ones because my Instagram was flooded with
options. Ready?”
    Sophie  grabs the camera and films  Liam,  Jax, and Maya  sitting  on a
bench with  the  supertrees in the  background. Fan-fucking-tastic.  A  few
people walk behind them and wave at the camera.
    A  burning sensation settles in my gut.
    “Some  are embarrassing, and others are  outright  silly,  but I  can’t  be
biased. I picked whichever ones were asked the most.” Maya smiles as she
pulls out a paper with a list of questions.
    I  remember the time I told her she can’t be biased. Guess she keeps me
in mind someway, making me smile.
    My  laptop bounces to the rhythm of my knee, nervousness and curiosity
coursing through me about where this  will  go. Most  of  the questions she
asks Liam and Jax are about F1 and the guys’ racing careers. Seven minutes
pass before Maya  asks about personal issues. Can’t  help  feeling  like  a
stalker watching them like this, but she does post it publicly. Screw it.
    “Jax   or  Liam.   Or   both.  The  lady   subscribers wonder  about  your
relationship status?”
    They both high-five  each other behind Maya like they’re five years old.
    “I  can answer for myself. I’m single and ready to mingle. Meet me at the
Singapore party after the Grand Prix if you’re interested in hanging out and
getting to know me.” Jax rubs a tattooed finger across his chin. Liam grins,
not answering the question, that sly little shit.

196
    Maya pretends to gag. “You heard it here first, everyone. I am not dating
either one of these guys. We’re all friends.” She nods enthusiastically. Liam
stays silent, winking at the camera and tapping his fingers on his thigh.
    Do  they hang out this much? How did I miss this?
    I  pull  up Liam’s  Instagram profile.  His most recent images are of  him
and Jax, or the four of them out touring whatever city the Prix is in. Plus, a
few hard-to-miss posts of him and Sophie.
    When did he clean up his act?
    Jax’s profile  looks similar. He has a picture of him and Maya in a photo
booth from a  gala event. I recognize the background because I was there
too, yet I don’t remember seeing Maya there.
    Where  did   they  even find   the  time  for  all   of  this  shit?  But  more
importantly, could I make time for something besides racing?





I land myself on the Singapore podium. Second place. Woo-fucking-hoo.
    This  time the champagne showers don’t feel as fun. The crowd roars but
I ignore them, my  eyes landing on Maya  standing behind a barrier as she
cheers Santi on. My  eyes stay glued to  her for  minutes. Her  grin  falters
when she catches me looking at her, but she regains her composure. Jax and
I end up spraying champagne on Santi since he impressively won the whole
thing. This  Prix  is a  challenge. Humidity  is  disgustingly high,  making it
hard for  us to  race with  our heads fully  in  it.  I  think  I  lost at  least five
pounds after racing  today. Not  joking,  sweat  still  drips  down my  back,
clinging to my race suit.
    Attendants escort us to the press conference after we all have a weight
check, an ice bucket bath, and a quick shower. The idea of answering more
questions fills me with dread because I’m not in the mood for reporters.
    It  stuns me to find Maya in her usual corner of the press conference. She
gives me a tight  smile  before Sophie whispers something in  her ear, her
throat dipping back as she lets out a laugh. Carefree and so damn beautiful.
I  lick  my   lips  at  the sight  of  her,  the  hollow  part  of  her  neck  easily
becoming one of my favorite places—to kiss, to touch, to nip.
    I’m   thankful  for  the  table in   front  of  me because I  don’t  need that
problem on camera today.

197
    Since press conferences can be boring as fuck, I run through my plan for
tonight. I can’t  skip out on the Singapore after-party Maya mentioned. She
glances at me, making my lips tip up into a naughty smile, the first one I’ve
given her in a while.
    Her eyes widen.
    If  only she knew what was coming. I’m done playing games; I’m getting
my checkered flag.





I pull  out the big  guns for  this. And  by big  guns, I mean Sophie because
she’s the   equivalent  of   a  grenade launcher  and   semi-automatic rifle
combined. Without her on my side, the plan is hopeless.
    I  text her after the press conference to please meet me in my hotel room.
She grumbles about it until I text her with  praying hands and a promise for
chocolate-chip cookies. Girl hasn’t changed in all the years I’ve known her.
    “What  do you want, Slade?” Her icy glare could make a normal man cry,
but instead, I grin. How formal of her to use my last name.
    I  make myself comfortable on the couch since Sophie refuses to sit. She
stands in  a power  pose,  ready to  take  me on,  hands  on her  hips.  An
intimidation stance that barely reaches past my head.
    “I’m   coming  to you  for help  because I really need it.  And  trust me, I
do.”
    Sophie  blows  a  bubble with   her  gum  before popping  it,  the  sound
breaking the tension in the room. She looks like a Barbie version of a mob
boss.
    “How   can I help you? I  don’t even know what you  want.” She likes to
play dumb, batting her eyelashes at me.
    “I  think you do.”  Let’s cut the bullshit.
    “I  want to hear you say it. The first step in fixing  a problem is admitting
you have one in the first place.”
    Yup. This is why Liam  can’t help being around her. She gives him a run
for his money, all sassy and shit.
    I  suppress a groan and tug at my hair. “I like Maya.”
    Her  blank   gaze gives  nothing  away. She  blinks  a  couple of   times,
waiting for me to continue.

198
    “And   I  messed up. I  thought I  knew what  I  wanted. But  in  reality, I
didn’t.”
    “Tell  me more.” She sits down, her pose looking like my therapist.
    “I  took her out on a date. I’m sure you’re aware of that.” She nods. “And
it didn’t  exactly  end well.  I told  her I  could only  offer  physical stuff. No
attachments or frills, and she wanted more.”
    “No  duh. And what do you want now?” Her gaze reminds me of her dad,
staring into me like she can sense my sincerity.
    I  look away from her intense scrutiny. “I think I want more.”
    “I  don’t  think you  should do anything unless you know you want more.
Maya’s the sweetest. She doesn’t need someone who isn’t willing to go all
the way. Like make sacrifices for her.”
    My   fists tighten  in  front  of  me. “I   can try.  I  never even wanted this
before. But seeing her all the time, from far away, I feel  terrible. I struggle
to not go up and talk  to her, or even kiss her. I want  a chance. But I need
your help.” I glance at Sophie.
    She looks  at me with  a genuine smile and warm  eyes, the opposite of
how she was when the conversation began. “Share with me what you have
planned. I’ll see what I can do on my end.”





I’m  nervous because I don’t  know if  Sophie will   hold  up her end of  the
deal. Hell, she concocted half of the plan after she deemed my original one
unfit. Once I told her I seriously wanted to date Maya, Sophie became a lot
more willing  to help,  coming up with  a few ideas she thinks Maya  would
like. She nixed my  original plan  to show up at the Prix  after-party, telling
me Maya doesn’t function well  past 12 a.m. Lucky for me, Singapore Prix
weekend includes events until the following  Monday because they love to
party over here.
    I   sit  at an  empty  table at  an exclusive  restaurant. Sophie secured a
private room that will  force Maya to give me her undivided attention for at
least an hour, but I hope for more if  I  buy a good bottle of  wine. Because
who can resist that? My fingers tap against the table, a nervous tick I picked
up from the fidgeter herself.
    Finally,  after what feels like forever, someone knocks on the door.

199
    “Okay,  you  guys. This  is the strangest dinner plan  ever—”  Her voice
cuts off when her eyes land on me sitting alone.
    Her  eyes widen while her mouth drops open. She’s dressed up in a sexy
black cocktail dress with  her dark hair  flowing  around her face in  waves,
adding to her gorgeousness. I take a deep breath to settle my own nerves.
    I  stand and walk up to her slowly to prevent her from fleeing.
    “What’s  going  on?” Her  eyes dart around the room, taking  in  the two
seats, before they land on me.
    “Let   me explain  over  dinner.”  My  hand clutches  hers as I  walk  her
toward the chair across from mine, hoping she decides to stay. I pull out her
seat and usher her into it. A compliant Maya may be my favorite version of
her.
    “I’m   confused. I’m guessing Sophie is in on this plan?”  She lets out an
adorable soft curse under her breath.
    “Correct.  Let’s order a drink first because we both can use one.”
    We get situated and order our  food right  away at Maya’s persistence. I
take her biting on her lip  as a guilty yes that she wants to leave as soon as
possible.
    I  sigh before speaking. “I had two months to get you out of  my system.
And trust me, I tried.”
    She flinches at my words.
    Fuck, come on. I suck at expressing myself. “Not like that. I mean, I had
to sit with my own decisions.”
    She relaxes in her chair. I take another deep breath, calming my nerves.
Think before you speak.
    “I   thought it  would  get easier with  time.  But you  avoided me, which
sucked. I went from seeing you every day, and talking to you and spending
time together, to nothing.”
    “I  wasn’t trying  to ignore you.” Her eyes flick across the room.
    I  give her a pointed look.
    “Okay,  fine. I  was trying to  a teensy bit. I told  you what I  wanted, and
you rejected  me. I  can’t  expect you  to  change any  more than  I  expect
myself to. It’s not fair to either one of us.”
    “Well,   I have changed, and I  want to  try  to give  you what  you want.
Spending all that time alone, I realized I want what you want. To spend time
with you before and after races, like going on dates, hanging out at events,

200
being lazy in bed together after mind-blowing  sex. Give me all  the strings
attached.” The thought of rejection makes my stomach drop.
    Her eyebrows dart up. “How  do I know you won’t  back out the moment
you get scared?”
    I  don’t  blame  her for  being  skeptical when  I  haven’t  exactly proven
myself yet. “You don’t.  And I  don’t either. But it’s  what I can give you for
now. The real question is are you willing to take it?”
    She can back out at any moment. I  can tell  she thinks hard about it by
the way she works her bottom lip between her teeth.
    She  looks  down  at her  hands. “I   guess we can  give  it  a  try.  What
changed your mind?”  Something warm spreads through my  chest, eating
away at the uncertainty and nervousness from before. Her agreement is all I
need.
    I  lift  her chin up, craving eye contact. “I mean it when I say I spent a lot
of time alone. I reflected on what was stopping me from trying this out with
you. Our chemistry is—”  her lips  capture my attention—“explosive. But  I
also know there’s more. I like being around you, especially when you give
me all  your  attention. I  like  when  you  film  me  without  asking because
you’re afraid  of  me saying  no, even though you  can get  me to  agree to
anything. I  love the way  you  laugh almost as much as the way  you  find
your shoes interesting when you get nervous. I really like the special noises
you save just for me when I  kiss you, or  the smiles you give me when no
one is looking. I’m  serious about trying it all  with you.  No holding back. I
even met  with  someone to  talk  about my  own  issues and reservations,
because when I do something, I go all in.” Clearly came down with a severe
case of word vomit.
    She looks  as surprised as I  feel about revealing  my secret. And  fuck,
vulnerability scares me, but I can trust Maya. I need to trust her. For once in
my life, I don’t  view leaning on someone else as a negative.
    “I’m   proud of you. That’s a huge step.” She grabs my hand and gives it a
squeeze. A buzz similar to sticking my finger in an electrical socket courses
up my arm.
    I  nod,  not wanting  to  break the moment  by  hashing out my  parental
issues. “I’ve missed being around you.”
    “I   have too. It’s  not the easiest thing—avoiding you  when all  my fans
are dying to hear and see more of you.” She shoots me a wink. “I had to fill
the time with other interviews.”

201
    My  breath hitches at the easygoing smile on her face, finally getting the
grin  I’ve  waited  weeks for.  She fills   me with  hope.  It’s  a new  feeling,
wanting someone to believe in me while desiring to prove myself worthy of
her.
    “We  should give the subscribers what they want. I watch your  videos.”
My cheeks heat up at my admission. I chug wine before I continue, needing
extra help tonight. “I may be partial, but I think I’m  better clickbait than Jax
or Liam.”
    Her  giggle fills   the room. It’s  the best thing I’ve  heard all  week, even
better than winning second place.
    And  it hits me.
    Shit.

202
25

203
                                                    Maya






We are doing this. Noah and me.
    I  never imagined he would come around. Days turned into weeks since
the Baku disaster, and he didn’t make a move, except for the time in Italy.
    Noah hires a car to take us to a party, the lights of the city passing us by.
Noah grips my hand on his lap, occasionally giving  it a squeeze, checking
that I’m still  here.
    “I  don’t  want my brother to know. At  least not yet.” I look  at him head-
on, no shoes stealing my attention this time.
    The  temperature  in  the  car  drops  a  couple degrees. It   may  sound
dramatic, but I swear it happens.
    “Why?”  His  edgy voice makes me frown.
    My  eyes plead with his. “It’s  new. I don’t  want to distract him from  the
Championship since you’re both teammates and he won’t like it.  He tends
to be overprotective of me.”
    Noah doesn’t talk for  a full minute. I shift  in my seat, waiting for him  to
say anything. His frown makes me wish I could take back my words.
    “I’m   not  happy about it  because I don’t want  to treat you  like  a dirty
secret. I’m happy to be with  you…but if  that’s what you  want, I’ll  respect
it.” He shrugs.
    “If   it works out, I’ll   tell him  after the Championship, once everything is
finalized for him.”
    His  blue eyes stay pinned to mine. “It’s going  to work out, so we’ll  tell
him when you’re ready.” His clipped voice has a finality to it.
    “Thank  you.” I  move close to him and wrap my arms around his waist, a
new gesture that feels right. He gives the top of my head a quick kiss before
he returns my hug.
    “Now,  time  for kissing  and making up. I  hear that’s the best part.”  He
mumbles the words into my hair.
    My  laugh makes his own chest rumble.
    I  can now confidently  say kissing and making up might be my  favorite
part too.

204
I’ve  watched extravagant weddings on television, even a few crazy sweet
sixteen parties where a kid cries over getting the wrong colored convertible.
All  those  parties one-up  each other  with  new  levels  of  craziness. If   I
combined every single overdone party known  to man, that would  sum up
what Noah and I walk into for the Singapore celebration. Do all local events
look like  this—filled   with  indulgence, celebrities, and glam bordering  on
obscene? It’s a party Gatsby  would envy.  But I  love  every second of  it,
soaking up the activities, including a side stage where people perform.
    People say this  is one  of the  best parties of the  entire Championship.
None of the galas so far hold a candle to it. We stand on the rooftop of the
most  famous  building   in  the   city  overlooking   the  whole   island,  the
supertrees glowing while buildings around us light up.
    “Amazing,  isn’t  it?  Plus, now I  have a date, which  makes it ten times
better.” Noah’s hand grips my waist. His  sexy smirk  makes my heart pick
up and my thighs clench. I sigh  at the grin he saves especially for me. He
wears a navy-blue tux today with black lapels and a crisp white shirt. I love
the look on him, especially when my eyes gaze upon the bow tie. He looks
dreamy.
    He  gives  me a  peck on  the  lips.  My  body  stills  as I  search around
nervously for my brother.
    “I’ll    keep an eye out  for  him.  Don’t  worry.”  His  gruff  voice vibrates
against my chest. Lying to my brother makes me sick with worry, making it
difficult  to fully enjoy attending the event with Noah.
    Darkness cloaks us, giving us the ability  to disappear into large crowds
of people, becoming one of the many partygoers. We grab drinks at the bar
before we search for our friends.
    We find  them soon after, Noah’s fingers tensing before he removes them
from my  waist. The loss of  contact makes me frown. But  it’s  a necessary
precaution at the moment, at least for the next two months until the World
Championship is over.
    We pull  up to the table Jax and Liam reserved, bottles of alcohol set up
in the center. Sophie sits next to  them. I take up  a spot next to  her while
Noah sits on the opposite side with the boys.

205
    “Did   it work  out between you two?”  She yells over the music  into my
ear.
    I  nod my head up and down in confirmation. “I’m   surprised you helped
pull that plan off. What happened to saying no to fuckable bodies?”
    She winks at me. I laugh because it looks way more like a twitch.
    “This  time it was worth it. I  have faith it’ll  all work out. The magic dildo
told me so.” Both of her dimples show.
    “Hey,  I finally   found you. Didn’t  see you earlier.” My  brother pulls me
up for  a hug. His  words  tug at  my thin  resolve, my  lies building  a  wall
around myself.
    I  play off  my discomfort. “You’ve  been busy being a Champion and all.
Must  be  such a  hard  life.   Hopefully   your  hand hasn’t  cramped  from
carrying the trophy around all day.”
    “If   I have to do another interview I’ll scream. How do you guys ever get
used to this?” He glances at the guys who send him a hello.
    “You  don’t. Eventually press conferences become a running joke. Check
some of ours  out on  YouTube.”  Liam  hands a shot glass to  my  brother
before tipping his own back. He pours alcohol for the rest of us. Sophie and
I knock  ours back  at the  same time, my  nose scrunching as the alcohol
burns my throat.
    I  try to pace myself throughout the night. A for effort. F for execution.
    I’m  drunk by 12 a.m. Liam and Sophie dance around together. Both look
smashed, Sophie stepping all over his toes with her sneakers, but he takes it
like a man, chuckling at her drunken display. Pretty much everyone has let
go and is having a good time except Noah. My brother left so I get the all-
clear to scoot over to his side of the couch.
    “Why  are you sober?” I try to pout my numb lips.
    “I  think I’m  going to cool it on the alcohol for a while.”
    Right. He and alcohol have a rough history.
    My  heart thumps in my chest as he smiles down at me. “You have such a
good smile. It’s  not fair.  I  want to look  that good.”  My  fingers touch  his
face, grazing the rough stubble beneath them, imagining how it would feel
in other places.
    His  chest shakes from laughing. “You look even better.” He brushes my
hair out of my eyes like a gentleman. His lips brush up against my temple,
pressing sweetly before leaving again.
    “Your  kisses are the best. Like nothing I’ve ever had,” I whisper-shout.

206
    “Oh,   tell   me  more.”   He  lures  me  in,   wanting  to  hear  my   drunk
confessions.
    I  glance around to confirm Santi’s gone. All clear.
    “They  turn me on. Like a lot.” Killing  the sexy game, I think.
    But  he snickers at me instead of answering.
    “What’s   so funny?  Why  are  you  laughing at  me? I’m   busy  flirting.
Hello.” I  push at his shoulder to make him stop.
    He  shoots me a breathtaking smile. My  arms cross over my  chest, his
eyes narrowing as he stares down  at my  cleavage. I return  the favor  by
checking him out. His messy hair does it for me, along with the bow tie he
already undid an hour ago. Sigh.
    I  grin. “Let’s blow  this popsicle stand.”
    He  throws his  head back and lets  out a  roar of  laughter. I  like  being
funny.
    “Should  I take that as a yes?” I clap my hands together.
    “Sure,  Maya. Let’s go. Meet me outside in five  minutes.” Noah gets up
from the table and says his goodbyes to the group. He acts like an expert at
this incognito stuff to the point that someone could think we’d planned it all
before.
    I  scroll through my phone, a hard job when all I want to do is get up and
leave with Noah.
    I  wait  for   a total  of  four  minutes before making  my  grand exit.  My
brother mopes at my departure after I find him  schmoozing with sponsors.
His sulking  looks vaguely like  mine, and I don’t  like  how much I  corrupt
him.
    I  check the town car’s license plate like Noah told me to. Numbers blur
but it looks about right. My  body falls into  the bench seat dramatically, my
dress swooshing around me as material flies everywhere.
    The ride back to the hotel is quick with our driver  adjusting his rearview
mirror  in hopes of  sneaking a peek at  our heavy  petting and toe-curling
kisses in the back seat. Noah barks at him to cut it out and to keep his eyes
on the road. The older man sputters out an apology, the sound of his mirror
returning back to normal making me laugh. At least until Noah shuts me up
with more kisses.
    I  struggle  to  keep my  eyes open by  the time  we pull  into  the  hotel.
Alcohol hits me all at once, my body giving up the battle to stay awake. We
both get out of the car at the same time since the hotel looks empty.

207
    Noah  practically  carries  me to  the  elevators. My   feet are  finding  it
difficult  to keep up with  his pace; they’re dragging behind me as he holds
me up.
    I’m  a giggling mess, but he joins me like a good sport.
    It’s  all fun and games until he rejects my advances in his room.
    “What  do you mean, no?” My  vision clouds as I  take in a blurry Noah,
his tux jacket abandoned, and his bow tie lost somewhere in the car ride. He
snickers when I stomp my foot for good measure.
    “You’re  drunk. I  don’t want to risk you  not remembering the first time I
fuck you. I’m a gentleman, meaning I want to fuck you sober.”
    “I’ll   remember. I promise.” I lift  up two  fingers like a Scout’s honor. He
props up one more to show me how it’s really done.
    “What  do I know, I wasn’t a Girl Scout.”
    Noah  laughs as he  pulls  me toward  the bed. It’s  one  of  my  favorite
sounds, gruff and short. He shows me exactly what he can do even if  I’m
drunk.

208
26

209
                                                    Maya






I wake up the next morning not being able to breathe. Something heavy lies
on my chest, making it difficult  for my  lungs to expand, not to mention the
warmth against my side.
    I  bolt  up  and try  to  piece together what  happened. My  body relaxes
when I find Noah’s golden arm wrapped around my stomach. He rolls onto
his other side at my jolt, replacing me with a pillow, looking  innocent as he
hugs it. I smile down at him and enjoy a younger-looking Noah.
    My   memories come  back of  how  we  stayed in  his  room  last night,
making out like teenagers.
    My  phone buzzes on the nightstand with a text from Santi.

         Santi  (09/17 9:13  a.m.): Where  are you? You didn’t  sleep in
         your bed.

    A  wave of  shame hits me as I  type out  another lie. My  thumb hovers
over the send button, unsure about how far my deception will go. But Santi
wouldn’t understand. At least not during this season, with tensions through
the roof between him and Noah. I seal my fate by pressing send.

         Maya  (09/17 9:15 a.m.): Stayed with Sophie. Did  you just get
         to the room?

         Santi  (09/17 9:18 a.m.):  Uh,  yeah. I’ll  text you  after I  take a
         nap.

    A  nap at 9 a.m.? He’s always preferred to be private about his love life
ever since he and his high-school girlfriend broke up after he chose F1 over
her. Now my  brother keeps his heart locked  up like  a maximum-security
prison.
    I  squeal when Noah’s arms tug me back to bed, ending my conversation
with Santi. Warm sheets wrap around my body  as Noah pulls me into  his
chest.
    “What  are you  doing up this  early?” I  dig  how his voice  sounds extra
gravelly in the morning.

210
    I  lay my  head on his chest. “Santi texted me to check in. Told him  I’m
staying with Sophie.”
    “Mm.   When does your  flight  take  off?”  His  fingers drag through  my
hair, untangling knotted strands.
    “Later  today on a red-eye. We’re flying straight to the next race.”
    He pauses his hand movements. “You know what that means?”
    Can’t say I do. My brain doesn’t function in the morning without coffee.
    My  voice strains. “No. But tell me.”
    More   running  of  fingers  through  my  hair.  “Now   that  you’re   sober
enough to consent, I have a few things in mind.”
    Noah’s  lips find  mine,  kissing me senseless. I break away after a  few
minutes.
    “I   want to shower first.  I feel  gross after the club last night.”  My  nose
scrunches at the thought of not washing off my makeup. I may or may not
look like a racoon, but I need a mirror to confirm.
    “What  a  great idea. Let me help  you.”  Noah hauls me out of  bed and
toward the  bathroom. He  places me  on  my  feet  before he  sets up  the
shower, turning knobs and checking the temperature.
    “It’s  a tough task. Are you sure you’re up for the job?” I bat my lashes.
    I  don’t even know if I’m  up for the job. Are we doing this? Going all the
way?
    Noah  answers the question for me  when he pulls  off  the big  T-shirt I
wore to sleep. I don’t even question how I ended up in said T-shirt, but I’m
going with the flow, not wanting to kill  the moment.
    “You’re   so beautiful.”  He runs a hand through his  already messy hair.
His eyes roam over my body, taking me in. The way he looks at me makes
me feel sexy, invigorated, and brazen.
    I  find it tough to distinguish steam from tension in the bathroom. It’s hot,
he’s hot, the whole situation  is fucking  hot. My  body feels feverish  as he
slowly appraises me again. His fingers drag across the slopes of my breasts,
my skin  pebbling at  his touch,  while excitement  bubbles within  me. His
hand finds the clasp of  my  bra and he snaps it off,  leaving only  my  lace
panties. The last barrier between us.
    My   boobs bounce as I move closer to  him.  I decide he looks  entirely
overdressed and his boxer  briefs  need to  go.  My  hand  dips  below  his
waistband, brushing against his cock, swiping at the bead of pre-cum on his
tip. His body tenses and he groans.

211
    “Let  me  help you out of  these.” I  pull  at the waistband and drag them
down his muscular legs. He kicks them off, exposing me to his naked glory.
    My  oh my, is it  a sight indeed. People rave about American football or
hockey players or  any other  type of  sport. Ladies  don’t  understand how
sexy F1 racers are. I pant at the image of Noah standing before me, all his
golden skin visible, muscles tensing at my assessment. I was right. He does
have rock-hard  abs, a fuckable  body,  and kissable lips.  He  even  has a
defined v-cut  that  I  want  to  run  my  tongue  across. His  cock  is  huge,
begging to be touched, licked, and fucked. I’m game for all of the above.
    “God.  How  many hours do you work out  in a day?” The question slips
past my lips without a filter.
    He chuckles to himself, making me glad I  got my stupid question out of
the way. His body isn’t  even remotely fair. I  shut my eyes and open them
back up to make sure I see everything right.
    I  bite  my lip  at the sight  of him.  He pulls  me toward him,  ending our
eye-fucking session.
    “How   about  I   show  you  how  much  stamina  I   build  up  from   my
workouts. That’s  the most impressive  part.”  He runs his  hand down  my
spine.
    I’m  sold.
    Our shower remains temporarily forgotten. His lips find mine, his tempo
desperate, persistent, and careless. Teeth gnash, bite, and suck. Sensations
overwhelm me, making me question if this is too much. I can combust here
with  a few  touches to my  center. His tongue  strokes mine, invading  my
mouth and taking me prisoner. Sign me up for this life  sentence. My heart
hammers in my  chest, unable to  settle down  at Noah’s relentless kisses.
Hands grope his body, testing, touching, wanting, and assessing the ridges
of his muscles as I memorize every part of him.
    His  hands find my underwear. Fingers trail the outside until they dip into
my core. I groan as his fingers rub against me, making my body pulse with
need.
    A  snapping sound rings over our labored breaths before loose lace falls
at my feet.
    “You  tore my  underwear? I’ve never had that happen before. I thought
that was a thing in movies.”
    His  husky laugh turns me on even more.

212
    “I’m   not like any of the guys you’ve been with before. I may not be your
first  fuck,  but I  might  as well  be.”  His  domineering  words ignite  every
nerve ending in my body.
    Noah seals his possessiveness with a kiss. He demands everything from
me, leaving no room for objections as he shatters any last bits of insecurity
about us.
    He  lifts  me in  one easy swoop, my legs instinctively  wrapping around
his waist as he carries me to  the shower. Our lips  break contact when he
situates us under the waterfall of hot water. Because this is Singapore and
the people here  are extra  as fuck,  it  pours  around both  of  us  from  all
different directions,  like  they  made this shower  with  couples in  mind.  I
thank them for their thoughtfulness.
    He pushes me against the shower tiles while his mouth finds mine again.
Our kisses become lazier, less hurried, as we enjoy the time  together. It’s
the sweetest he’s ever kissed me before.
    He  puts me down  and grabs the soap bar. His heavy gaze follows  the
contours of my body as he runs the soap across my skin, starting with my
neck. Suds start to pour down my breasts. He spends extra time there as he
brings my nipples  to two  sharp points. His  hand creeps slowly down  my
stomach, making sure to soap up every part of me. My knees wobble at his
caresses. But he takes his job seriously, being extremely thorough, learning
every curve and dip of my body.
    My   breaths come out labored as his  hands dip between my  legs. His
fingers find  my center, but he  remains focused on his task. I  moan as he
washes me in  my most  intimate  place and cleans every  part of  me.  He
continues to lather me, all the way down to my feet.
    A  comfortable silence cloaks us; the only sounds in the shower include
running water  and our heavy  breathing. Neither of  us want  to  break the
moment with words. I copy his same movements, running my hands across
his chest, spreading soapy bubbles. I relish in the feel of him,  his muscles
straining under my touch. He  closes his eyes, enjoying my touch, a moan
slipping past his lips. Damn, I feel powerful making him feel just as good.
    I  commit to  my cause, soaping him up wherever my hands go, roaming
down his body and the ridges of his stomach. He groans as my small hands
wrap around his cock.  I pump  once, twice, until  he  places his hand over
mine.

213
    “Your  hand feels  so fucking  good, but you  don’t  have to do  it  if  you
don’t want to. We can wait.”
    My  lips smirk at him. I  love how he’d hold off for  me but I’m more than
ready to go, not needing his chivalry.
    I  move along,  kneeling to wash his  legs. My  hands return to his  cock
after I  ditch the soap. My  hand wraps around it  before I  take him  in  my
mouth, the taste of him both salty and clean. His head tilts back against the
shower tiles and he lets  out a moan as my  tongue traces along his shaft.
Vibrations from my  laugh prompt him to fist  my wet hair  in his hands and
tug. I  pull   away to  look  up  at him,  interested in  getting  a read  on the
situation, seeing a disarmed Noah at my mercy.
    “Don’t   stop now. Finish what you started,” he growls before tugging on
my hair. All righty then. Don’t have to tell me twice.
    I  suck him  off  like  it’s an  Olympic  sport. I lick,  stroke, and graze my
teeth to  add a  different  sensation. He  groans, pulling   on  my  hair. His
reactions make me feel powerful, seductive, and turned on. My other hand
massages his balls, giving them extra attention. Our eyes connect, blue eyes
piercing mine as he brands my heart along with my body.
    “Where  the fuck did you learn to suck cock so good? Shit.” He moans as
I suck him even deeper than before. His cock grazes the back of my mouth,
testing my gag reflex. “Actually,  wait.  Don’t answer me, Maya. Shit, feels
fucking amazing.”
    I’d  laugh if I  wasn’t occupied.
    His  hands tug at my hair again, the sting turning me on more.
    A  tingling  sensation creeps up my spine. My hand that was massaging
his balls moves toward my center. I touch myself, feeling how needy I am.
He takes control of  my  head and allows my  other hand to  play with  my
breasts. His hands push my head up and down his thick shaft while I stroke
myself in desperation. I insert two fingers, slowly pumping to the rhythm of
me sucking his cock.
    He  looks  down  at me  pleasuring myself.  His  lazy  smile excites  me,
igniting me from my heart to my clit.
    “Holy   shit, you’re so sexy. Look at you, sucking my  cock while getting
yourself off. Oh  my God. You better be ready because I’m going to come.
Now’s your chance to back out.”
    I’m  right  there with him,  my strokes becoming more frantic. No way in
hell I’m  not tasting him. Warm cum hitting  the back of my  throat does me

214
in as I swallow everything he offers. He pulls out after finishing, giving  me
a moment to find relief.  I moan as I explode on my own hand. Stars dance
behind my eyelids as I come down from my haze, water falling on me while
I sit  in  an unholy  prayer pose. No  Hail  Mary  can save me  from  him.  I
glance up at him, offering a playful grin in return.
    “You’re  going to  be the death of me. I just fucking know  it.”  Noah lifts
me off  the floor  and shuts off  the  water. He grabs us  two fluffy   towels,
paying special attention to me as he wipes me dry. I wrap the fluffy   towel
around me like a dress while he wraps my  wet hair in  another towel. The
gesture makes my heart squeeze, aware of how  I’ve  never had someone
take care of me like this before.
    We end up back on the bed, but this time the experience feels different.
Noah’s movements show no rush to get this show on the road. I sit up as he
removes the towel from  my  head and tosses it over  the side of  the  bed,
landing with a thud on the carpet. My eyes bulge at the brush in his hand. I
let out a soft moan as he gets behind me and brushes my hair, starting at the
bottom, removing knots meticulously.
    “This  is  single-handedly one of the best things a guy has ever done for
me.” My  eyes close, enjoying the feeling of the brush running through my
wet hair. I have no shame. Noah brushing my hair turns me on, the sensory
experience making my heart swirl with emotions I can’t place.
    He laughs. “You’re setting the bar too low for me.”
    Noah  enjoys the task, giving it  his all.  Once all  the knots are gone, he
returns the brush to the bathroom. I turn toward  his standing form next  to
the bed.
    “You’re  gorgeous. A natural beauty.” His  heated gaze travels down my
towel-clad body, taking in my hotel fashion piece. Who knew I could make
a towel look sexy?
    One moment he stands next to the bed, the next moment he kneels on the
floor while his hands pull my legs toward the edge of the bed.
    I  think I died and went to heaven.
    Noah  stares at me  with  intense eyes as he  plucks the  towel  off  me,
exposing me again to him.
    “I’ve   thought about this for months. We’re going to enjoy every second
of it because I’m in no hurry.”
    I   gasp when his  fingers  find  my  core. They  part me  and his  mouth
replaces his fingers, making me lift off  the bed at the feeling of his tongue

215
brushing against me. One of his hands pushes me back down and holds me
there. His mouth is a relentless torture of the best kind, the mind-numbing
type. I’m  not sure if I  could tell you my  own name. He knows what to do,
making the guys from my past look like amateurs. Let this be the only time
I thank all the women before me.
    Noah really is a fucking champion. Someone give this man a trophy.
    He  licks me, marking me, clearly  enjoying the sounds that fall past my
lips. Shit, it  feels good. His  strokes change speed and pressure, lapping at
my center, making the most of the whole experience. The rough texture of
his tongue makes my core pulse. He adds two fingers that slide easily inside
of me, my body aching for his touch as his pumps match his licks. Pressure
inside me builds.
    “I’m   so close. Oh my God, Noah.”
    His  throat rumbles. The sensation of that combined with the unyielding
pump of his fingers pushes me over the edge. I combust, my brain soaring
away from me. His  licks continue as I  come down from  my high—a lust-
induced haze  that  beats any  drug.  My   brain  shuts  down,  a  prickling
sensation traveling down my spine all the way to my curled toes.
    He gives me a sweet kiss right at my core, making me melt on the spot.
    Here lies Maya Alatorre.
    “Death  by orgasm. Seems like a good way to go.” My  face heats at my
mistake in saying that aloud.
    He chuckles. “We’re not done yet. Save your eulogy for after the finale.”
His wicked grin brings a smile to my face and a warmth to my center.
    He  keeps me  in  this position  as he  searches for what  I  assume is a
condom in the nightstand. I frown when he pulls one out, questioning how
he knew one would be there in the first place.
    He  looks down at me, his smile dropping until  realization dawns across
his face. He sifts through the nightstand, pulling out a box that still  has the
plastic wrapping. His knees hit the hotel carpet, making us eye-level.
    “Brand  new pack. I’m   serious when I say I  haven’t been with anyone.
Not since that day.” His eyes flit  to the side, shame marring his face about
Baku.
    “I  believe you. You said you want  to try, that you’re all  in?” I  look into
his blue eyes, giving him an out in case he wants to take it.
    Noah  doesn’t blink.  “Maya,  I’m   willing   to try.  You won’t  regret  it.  I
swear.”

216
    I  bring  my  lips  to  his,  sealing his  words with  a  kiss. He  breaks the
moment as he stands up, his eyes darkening as he gazes down my  body
again.
    He fists  his dick and pumps a few times, pre-cum dripping from the tip,
enticing me. I lick my lips at the sight.
    “Next  time.”  His thumb rubs the drop before he brings it to my mouth. I
suck on the pad of his thumb, tasting his saltiness. His eyes darken as I lick
and nibble.
    “You’re  a naughty little  thing. I would  have never guessed that you like
to play dirty.”
    The  quintessential sound of foil ripping  fills  me with  excitement. “You
haven’t seen anything yet.”  Yup. Those words  came out of  my  mouth. I
blame him because I’m not  usually such a mouthy one, but he boosts my
confidence.
    He smiles while shaking his head. “I’m going to hold you to that.”
    Noah  gives no warning.  No sweet words before he grabs my  legs and
thrusts himself into me, the hotel bed perfectly situated for this position. My
eyes water at the amazing feeling of him filling   me. His dick  is big, and I
haven’t exactly done this in  a while. But  he reads my body like  he’s been
doing this to  me forever. His  fingers find  my  clit,  rubbing it,  making my
body pulse with pleasure instead of pain. I forget the uncomfortable feeling
of him stretching me to my limits.
    “You’ll   get used to it. I promise.” He kisses my lips softly. Another kind
gesture, his words sinking into me and taking residence in my heart.
    He moves inside of me, his previous sweetness abandoned.
    “Holy  shit.”  Words breathlessly escape my lips.
    “You’re   fisting  my  cock so  tightly,  Maya. It’s  like  a  dream. If  I  had
known it would  be this good, I don’t  think I  would have held back for this
long.” His  groans fill the room. I  grab the sheets above my head, desperate
for something to ground me as he pounds into me slowly.
    He  stares into my eyes as he finds an amazing tempo. Our bodies move
together in harmony, our chemistry nothing short of fantastic.
    Noah drives it home. He grabs each of my legs and places them over his
shoulder blades. The position makes his dick feel like I’m being fucked for
the first time.  A sweet torment. His  pumps speed up as he slides easily in
and out of me. Rough hands rove over my breasts, pinching my nipples. I

217
arch my  back,  unable to  regulate my  body’s  responses, his movements
becoming eager and uncontrolled.
    “Oh.   My.  God.”  My  voice  comes off  as nothing more  than a  hoarse
whisper.
    He changes his position slightly, making his dick rub against my G-spot.
Noah controls the situation. My body quakes as he continues to thrust into
me, strategically hitting my  spot every time. I  throw  my head back as my
spine curves up toward him.
    “You  feel  fucking  amazing. Tell  me you’re  almost there.”  He doesn’t
wait for a response. My body says everything my mouth can’t with nothing
but moans and groans passing my lips. One hand finds  my clit  while  the
other grips one of  my ass cheeks. He pulls my  ass up off the bed, taking
advantage of the angle. His roughness adds to his appeal, showing me how
eager he is, and fuck it feels good. His desperation is my gain.
    “Yes!”
    My   body  vibrates, my  release closing  in.  I  can tell  by  the  strain in
Noah’s face he follows right behind me.
    “Noah…”   I don’t  recognize my own voice, the neediness foreign to my
ears.
    “Fuck  yeah, babe, I’m there with you.”
    Simple  words push me over the edge. I explode around him, my  moan
echoing off  the hotel walls.  He fucks  me like  a man possessed, his body
straining as he holds me in the position he needs while I lose myself in my
climax.
    Noah’s  stunning smile is the last thing  I see before my eyes close. His
orgasm hits him, his cock twitching inside of me as he rides out his release.
Frantic pumps become slower, lazier  before his body  shudders. He stays
inside of me until his cock softens, not wanting to break our connection.
    We groan together when he pulls out of me after a few minutes.
    “You’re  so damn perfect, inside and out.” Noah brushes loose hair out of
my face, running a knuckle across my flushed cheeks.
    I  smile at him. “You’re not too bad yourself.”
    He gives me a kiss before he takes care of the condom in the bathroom.
When he comes back, he drags me back to the head of the bed. We lie there
together. I bask in the afterglow of the best sex of my life.
    “Fuck,  Maya. That was the best sex I’ve ever had.”
    I  smile into his chest. Likewise.

218
27

219
                                                    Maya






Someone knocks on the hotel door, pulling me away from my  computer. I
open the door to find Noah leaning against the frame. He glides past me and
walks into the room, taking up a spot against the gray sectional while I take
a seat.
    “I  want to take you out on a date.”
    I  check the time on my  phone. “At  ten in the morning?”  Staying in the
hotel room sounds like a fine idea, unless the date he plans involves brunch
and mimosas. I can get behind that.
    “Exactly   why  we  better get  going.”  He  pulls  me  off  the  couch and
toward the bedroom to get ready.
    I  smack his hands away when he tries to help me take off my pajamas.
“Hands off or else we’ll never make it.”
    He chuckles to himself.
    “Does this date involve breakfast food?” Please say yes.
    “Nope.  But  afterwards we  can get something to  eat.” He  won’t  share
information. Suspicious.
    Noah’s  eyes gleam. I  should  be concerned because that look  usually
leads to hours in the bedroom. Take my word for it because we’ve bounced
around each other’s hotel rooms for the past week at all hours of the day.
    But  I  go along with  his plan  because it’s nice of him  to set up a date.
Noah claims he’s changed. Who am I to rain on his parade?
    I  still  can’t  deny my  apprehension about the whole thing. Not  the sex
part. That part is  banging. Okay, I  know  that pun is  bad. I  blame all  the
Instagram captions I have to come up with because being punny is basically
a full-time job.
    But  everything else between Noah and me still remains questionable. It’s
brand-spanking new with  us being  in  the relationship  honeymoon stage.
Ask me again once the going gets tough. Like when my lies to my  brother
about my whereabouts blow up in my face.
    Positive  energy flows  right  out of  me the  moment he pulls  up  to the
location of our  first  real date. An odd choice for  a one on one. I  drag my
body out  of the  car and take  a step apart from  him  the moment  we get

220
within range of the video cameras in the Bandini pit.  We still have to keep
up appearances in front of my brother and everyone else that can spill our
secret. Only Sophie can be trusted.
    “Our  date is at the racetrack?”
    My  eyes assess the crowd in front of us. Not sure why he wants to visit
the location for the Malaysian Grand Prix. Should I be worried about future
dates if he thinks this is a good spot for our official one as a new couple?
    I’ll   have to take charge of the next one.
    Noah  rubs his  hands together. “Think  of  this as a  trust exercise. You
know how people do trust falls?”
    “Uh.   Sure?”  I  nod along.  Uncertainty  creeps up  my  spine when  he
smiles down at me.
    “So,  I don’t want to worry  about how you might not trust me yet. I want
to make sure you do.  Because that’s the foundation of  relationships.” He
sounds confident about all of this.
    What  podcasts does he listen  to?  I  don’t  know  whether I  should  be
concerned or impressed.
    “Your  smile makes me a little nervous,” I blurt out. Nothing good comes
from his shit-eating grin, the same look I give my  parents when I’m hiding
something.
    He  walks toward Bandini’s  pit area, a silent command to follow  him.  I
wish  I  had  stayed in  the  car. Distant  sounds of   tires squealing  across
pavement alert my senses.
    A  group of people rallies around the pit area. Camera crews film people
getting inside of neon-colored Bandini cars, perfectly lined, making  up the
entire rainbow.
    I  make the mistake of reading the banner above our heads. Bandini Race
Day Experience. Drive like an F1 racer.
    Oh, no.
    His  hand gives mine a reassuring squeeze before he drops it.
    “Please  tell  me  we’re  doing  a  press appearance.” My  voice  sounds
stronger than I feel.
    Hope surges through me at the idea of coming to  watch and cheer fans
on. Noah can take them for a spin while I  stand behind the barriers, a few
fist pumps in the air to sell my enthusiasm while he careens down the track.
    “We  are.” He reveals nothing more. My heart rate slows down, confident
the date is what I expect. Safety barrier here I come.

221
    He speaks again. “But we’re filming from  inside that car.”
    Oh, shit. Please tell me he means I’m going to look inside the car for two
seconds. Slap the hands of  the nerds who  design the cars,  take a quick
photo, throw a thumbs up. A girl can dream.
    My  eyes follow  his pointing  finger. They land directly  on a neon green
Bandini car  with  open scissor doors. It  looks like  a  car from  the future,
estimated at about 500,000 dollars.
    “I   am not setting a foot  behind a steering wheel.” Over my dead body.
Hard no.
    “You   don’t  have to  worry  about that.”  He  fills  me  with  faith  before
ripping it away. “I’m  going to be behind the wheel.”
    I  need to put in a Bandini work order for this man to get a warning sign.
Noah all but drags me to the neon green beauty with black leather seats and
neon green piping.
    A  Bandini employee passes me a helmet. I don’t put up much of a verbal
fight with  Noah because people watch us, and I can’t be too embarrassing.
Press crew follows us, eating up my reluctant display like I drag my feet for
the fun  of it.  My  stomach rolls,  my  face most likely   matching the same
green shade as our car.
    I  take deep breaths, trying to relax.
    “Here  we have Noah Slade taking Maya Alatorre onto the track. Maya,
how do  you feel  about being  driven around by  one of  the  best race car
drivers out there?” A reporter jams a foam microphone in my face.
    “Nauseous?” my voice rasps.
    The reporter laughs at me like I  mean it as a joke. I shoot Noah a glare,
questioning if it’s too late to back out. My eyes dart between the car and the
pit lane, estimating how quickly I can run before Noah catches up to me.
    “It’s  interesting Maya chose to come out with you instead of her brother
today. Any thoughts on this, Noah?”
    My  palm drags down my face. Deep breaths.
    “I   can’t  help that  she wants to try  out  the track  with  me when  she’s
watched her  brother   drive  for   years.  But  there’s  nothing  like   taking
someone’s racetrack virginity.”
    Pretty  sure his response turned me on, and I’m halfway convinced I’m
dating the devil in disguise.
    He  shoots me a wink. “We’re  going to get going.  See you later, guys.”
He waves at the reporters like the natural he is.

222
    Following  his lead, I hop into the passenger’s side.
    Noah’s eyes gleam. “You packed your camera, right?”
    I  pull the camera out of my purse. He takes it from my hands and sets it
up on a conveniently placed camera mount.
    “My   heart may explode out of my chest. I might not make it through the
whole thing.”
    He chuckles. “You’ll  be okay, we’re only going to go about one hundred
and thirty to  one hundred and fifty miles  per hour. That’s not too bad. It’s
our trust test, remember?”
    I  no longer feel bad for disgruntled coworkers who have to do trust falls
during employee retreats. That has nothing on this cruel version.
    I  never did find out the recovery rate for having a heart attack at twenty-
three. Regrets.
    “Jesus take the wheel.” I  do the sign of  the cross before putting on my
helmet.
    “You  may have called me  God last night, but  I’m  the only  one behind
the wheel today.” The smug man fucking winks.
    His  hand finds  the  stick shift  and  we propel  down the  grid  area. He
laughs as  we  make  it  past  the  first  turn,  tires  screeching  against the
pavement while he speeds up again.
    “Damn,  I didn’t  hear you scream like that last night. Do I need to change
my technique?”
    “You  perv!  This is  terrifying.  Oh my God. How  do you  do this all  the
time? How is this even legal?” I’d  slap his arm if  I  wasn’t plastered to the
side of the car.
    “I  love it. Just relax and enjoy.” His voice does nothing to calm me.
    “Never  tell  a woman  to relax!”  I  scream again as we drift  on  another
turn. It’s  touch and go with  my heart, stopping every time Noah turns  the
car before picking back up again as he races down the road.
    “Who   can  ever  be  calm   at  a  time  like   this?  If   they  do,   they’re
certifiable.”
    Another  scream erupts from my mouth. I  don’t have the chance to feel
embarrassed, the loud shrieks pouring out of me with no control.
    The engine purrs as Noah’s lead foot hits the accelerator. His hand does
a bunch  of  shift  changes, which  are  honestly  kind  of  hot  because his
muscles strain and tense. I distract myself by staring at him in his element, a

223
smile plastered on his face, beaming at my reactions. My screams stop long
enough for me to check out how happy he looks.
    He hits  me with a megawatt grin. If my body wasn’t  already in fight-or-
flight mode, my heart rate would have sped up.
    “Eyes  on the road! Hello!”  I snap my fingers and point at the pavement
in front of  us. He chuckles while he turns into another straight section, the
car vrooming as he presses on the throttle.
    “I  could do this track in my sleep. It’s an easy one.”
    “That’s  great and all but I’d  rather live to see tomorrow.” I  take another
deep breath.
    He laughs as he checks me out. “Do you trust me yet?”
    “I   trust that  you’re secretly  a psycho. What kind  of  first  date is  this?
Haven’t you ever seen an episode of The Bachelor? This date is not Chris
Harrison approved!” I  grip onto the side of the car for  dear life. Those top
handlebar things  every  car  has? Yeah, I   learn  their  true  purpose, my
knuckles whitening as I hold on with all my might.
    Can he quit laughing at me?
    “That’s  not the answer I wanted to hear. I’ll have to step it up.”
    That,  friends, is  exactly the type  of thing  no  one asks for. It’s  meme-
worthy.
    His  hands turn nobs on the center console.
    “Uh,  what are you doing?”  My stomach churns as my body bounces up
and down, the car revolting against the high speeds Noah pushes it to. The
death contraption continues to zoom past empty bleachers. Speakers sound
off for  the first  time the entire trip,  the robotic voice sending a chill  down
my spine.
    Traction Control  Disabled.
    My  head whips to face Noah, my helmet bouncing off the window.  The
movement jars me.  Even I   know  the importance of   traction control…it
prevents the one thing Noah wants to do.
    He shrugs, sealing our fate.
    His  hands turn the wheel, our car drifting across the road before spinning
donuts. Tires squeal against the road. A cloud  of smoke swirls  around us
from rubber burning, floating up into the sky along with my sanity.
    “I   trust you!  I’ll  never not  trust you ever again. You’re  the best driver
ever. You’ll always keep me safe. Are you satisfied now?” I half laugh, half
scream the words,  sounding  like  someone who  belongs in  a  psychotic

224
thriller movie. There may even be a tear or two leaking from my eyes, but if
Noah asks me, I’ll deny it.
    He stops the donuts and we both end up breaking out in a fit of laughter.
His hand grabs mine and brings it up to his lips for a kiss, my previous fear
forgotten.
    “To  answer your  question from  before, yes I’ve  seen The Bachelor.  I
took  notes.  This  is   the  first   of  many   for  us,  so   I  had  to   make  it
unforgettable.”
    He hits me with a devilish grin before I flash him one of my own.

225
28

226
                                                    Noah






There are only two things that can suck the happiness straight out of me.
    One is any type of news of someone dying.
    And  two is my dad.
    The  second reason sends me a deceitful grin  that  makes my stomach
shrivel up.  He stands next to  my car in  the pit  area, his  negative energy
pulsing around him. Not exactly what I need before a practice session.
    Over  the years, I’ve  become a pro at  avoiding my  dad, an easier task
since I’ve never liked being around him when he gets angry. Now that I’ve
outgrown him, he  moves on from hitting  me to  verbal lashings. The time
Maya saw him  smack me…that  was unlike  him.  He usually  keeps calm
nowadays, at least physically, choosing to flip out when I perform less than
perfect on the track.
    “Dad,  what are you doing here?” What  I really  want to say is Dad, get
the fuck  out of  here. I  can’t  stand you.  But  I  don’t  say what  I  wish  to
because I prefer professionalism. Unfortunately, my dad funded a lot of my
career at the start, his name carrying  weight  at Bandini.  It  was his same
racing team after all.
    “After   your poor  display at the last couple of  races, I wanted to check
in.”
    Sure you did.
    But  this is my life. Anything  below first  place might as well be last. The
only thing  keeping me calm is the sound of  race cars zooming by while I
breathe in the smell of fresh car wax.
    “Right.  Hopefully  this one will  go better.” I can win the Japanese Grand
Prix since I’ve done it in the past.
    “And   here we are getting ready for the next practice session. Santiago,
do you have anything to say to your fans?”
    For  fuck’s sake, Maya has the worst timing.
    My  dad ogles her as she spins around in the  garage. Gross. She keeps
going, asking Santiago questions.
    My  dad focuses back on me.  “She’s a news reporter now? What’s she
doing in  the pit area? It’s  no place for a  woman.” He  still  lives in  an era

227
where women get married  and live  the rest of  their sad lives  in  the four
walls of their home. Times have changed, Pops.
    “Nope.  Santiago’s sister vlogs.” My girlfriend, I wish to say.
    Maya  and I  haven’t talked about titles  yet. We only  hashed things out
two weeks  ago in  Singapore. But  everything about  us feels  title-worthy
because we spend lots of time together whenever Santiago isn’t around. In
my bed, in hers, in one of the private suites, and secret dates in the cities we
visit. My sex drive with Maya rivals that of an eighteen-year-old.
    I  don’t like how my dad looks at her, pissing me off even more.
    “Hmm.  She shouldn’t be filming.”  His  growl of  a voice does nothing to
intimidate me.
    “They  already gave her the go-ahead for it. It’s been good publicity and
nice for branding since she has a lot of followers.” Shit. Did my voice sound
like I am proud of her?
    My  dad  assesses me, giving me the fucking chills.  His  perceptiveness
makes him cruel because he didn’t get where he is today by being stupid.
    “I  guess it’s fine,” he says.
    Everything  about his face screams how it isn’t.  His  eyebrows raise, he
rubs his chin, his eyes have an evil spark. A montage of every villain from
every movie.
    “I  better get ready for another practice round. I’ll see you later?” I don’t
want to leave him alone here with Maya, but I have to.
    I  sneak up next to her before hopping into my car.
    “Stay  away from my dad. He’s a sneaky piece of shit.”
    Her  eyes  widen. “Good   luck  out  there!”  She gets  my  message, her
retreating form comforting me as I get in the cockpit of my car.





Maya’s hand strokes my chest. We decided to stay in tonight and not attend
any sponsor events. No loss here. She texts  Santi about not  feeling well
while I tell the guys I have a headache.
    “I   don’t  think  it’s  going to  end well.  I  always  thought he was  a bad
guy…but he’s not. And now they killed him.”
    By  him, she’s referring to Bob on Stranger Things. Her tears dampen my
shirt.

228
    Wow, she really gets into shows.
    “Do  you always cry  during sad scenes?” I pull her into a hug. It’s  cute,
endearing even. But I don’t want her to cry over something not real.
    “I  have a lot of feelings. Okay?”  Her eyes glisten as she looks up at me.
I give her a soft kiss on her forehead, her sigh making me smirk.
    And  the action continues on the TV. Maya snaps her head back, eagerly
watching the next part.
    I  have learned my lesson. When they say, “Netflix and Chill,” they mean
to pick  the most boring show because any other choice means no sex, no
hooking up.
    I  fall into the Stranger Things trap. Maya swats my hand away whenever
I put a move on her.
    “You  need to stop sighing every time Steve is on the screen. This crush
has gotten out of hand.”
    My  heart surges at the sound of her laugh. A  weird feeling  I’ve grown
accustomed to whenever I hang around Maya, similar to how my dick gets
rock-hard whenever she gets near me.
    “I   can’t help  it.  That hair,  his babysitting  skills.  Even his personality.
Sigh.”
    How  the mighty  have fallen, becoming jealous over a TV  character. “I
can babysit. And  my hair  is  definitely  better. Personality? I sure as fuck
hope mine’s nicer seeing as I’m a real person. And I am older, wiser. I can
fucking  kick  ass with   a  baseball bat.”  I  flex   my  arms around  her  for
emphasis.
    “What   does older and  wiser have to  do  with  the appeal?”  Her chest
shakes against mine.
    She’s totally  teasing me. So I do what any logical man would  do in my
position. I  shut  off  the TV   and show  her exactly  how  more experience
comes with age. She stops complaining about the show the moment my lips
find her clit.





I creep around, listening in  on Santi and Maya’s conversation. It’s not my
fault they’re so loud and we share the same walls. Right?
    I’m  jealous of Santi. There. I put it out there.

229
    Maya  spends the whole morning before the race with him, hanging out
while I  spend the day by myself. She hides who we are from him  because
she doesn’t want to upset him or inconvenience him before the final Prix.
    Unfortunately  for the Alatorre siblings, I’m not above eavesdropping.
    “What  are you going to do once the season’s over?” Santi’s voice carries
through the thin walls.
    “Mm,  I  don’t know. I’ve  started to fall into my own  thing with my vlog.
I have over 900,000 followers. That’s, like,  amazing growth in  a YouTube
vlog career that started only eight months ago. The travel vlogging is nice,
but YouTube F1 videos are what make me trendy and different.”
    Pride in  her voice brings a smile to my  face. I watch her videos when I
miss her or boredom strikes, or when Santi steals her away because Maya
feels too guilty to say no.
    We’ve  already  traveled with   F1 for   eight months,  with  Maya  and  I
dating exclusively for the last four weeks.
    “But  is that really a job? Following me around?”
    What an idiot.
    “Uh.  I  don’t follow  you around.” Maya’s  voice hesitates, unsure how to
handle Santi’s obliviousness.
    “I   don’t mean to put you  down. But don’t  you want a nice, stable job?
One closer to home with less traveling? I can’t have you here forever.”
    You can’t. But I can.
    Or at least until Maya doesn’t want to be around anymore, if she doesn’t.
We still need to find our footing together.
    I  think up opinions like I’m  part of the conversation.
    She lets out a deep sigh loud enough for me to hear. Never a good sign.
    “I’m   living  in the moment. I’m young. I  have time to figure my life  out.
You don’t know  much about social media, but it’s growing—vlogging  is a
huge industry with good pay by views. And sponsorships.”
    “That’s  always your problem  though. You may live in  the moment, but
you gotta grow up sometime. Are videos a career?”
    “Wow…okay.   I  don’t  know  what made  you so  pissed off  today, but
you’re being a crappy brother right now. I’m going to take a walk.”
    An  idea hits  me. I open the door to  my suite the  moment Maya walks
past it, hurling her inside.
    “What  are you—”

230
    My  hand covers her mouth before she can get out another word. I bring
my index  finger  up to  my  lips.  Her  eyes change from dull  to  gleaming
because I can now change her mood for the positive. Fan-fucking-tastic.
    I  remove my hand from her mouth and lock the door behind her.
    I  check the time on  the clock. We have thirty  minutes before I need to
check in at the pit.
    “Think   you can keep quiet?” I whisper. Her brother is  a few feet away,
and the walls are thinner than a fucking condom.
    She bobs her head up and down, eyes lit with excitement.
    “Always   enthusiastic.” I  trail  a finger  from her  neck to her  chest. My
hands find the hem of her Bandini polo and pull it over her head, revealing
a white lace bra that makes my dick pulse.
    She toys with the zipper of my race suit.
    “You  look  so hot  in this.  I  almost don’t  want to  unzip it.”  Her  words
bring a smile to my face.
    I  shut her up with a kiss because I don’t want to risk Santiago hearing us.
My  tongue explores her  mouth, enjoying  her exclusive  taste, one I  find
addicting as hell. A  magnetic energy flows  around us, always pulling  me
back toward her. Not that I want to stay away. Our tongues dance and tease
each other. Our kiss stifles  her moan as my  hands explore her body, my
rough fingers brushing against her smooth skin.
    My   hands palm her perfect tits.  I  pull  down the  soft cups of  her bra,
revealing her perky breasts and tight, pink nipples. The best fucking sight. I
trail wet  kisses down her neck, sucking to the point  of marking  her. Fuck
would I like to. But I  move along because I don’t have enough time.
    My  dick throbs, rock-hard in my suit and craving her attention.
    Her    hands  get   caught  up    in   my   hair,   tugging   me   along   for
encouragement. I’m a man on a mission with a time limit.
    “Sh.”  I rub the rough pad of my thumb against her lips.
    Her  heavy breathing might give us away. She nods, staring down at me
while I  pull one of her taut nipples into  my mouth. Her back arches as she
pushes herself closer to me. I suck one nipple to a solid point before moving
on to the other, my tongue trailing along the divot in her chest.
    My   other hand  finds  the button  of  her  jeans. I  dip  my  hand below,
finding her slick  and ready for me. Talk  about the best fucking feeling,  to
turn her on with minimal effort required.

231
    Her  wild   eyes and messy hair  drive  me crazy.  Nothing  compares to
satiating the hunger between us, being able  to please her to  the point  of
oblivion.
    Maya’s  hand touches the outline of my  dick through  the race suit. She
palms me, doing soft movements up and down.
    “Time  to take this off,” she says in a husky murmur.
    Good girl.
    The  thrilling  sound of the zipper rings  through the room. Maybe Maya
corrupts me just  as much because I never do  anything like  this  before a
race.
    I  pull my  arms out of the top part of the suit and finish unzipping to my
waistline. The clock  tells me we have fifteen  minutes left.  While I  wish  I
had more time with  her, a quickie will  do. She tugs my  dick out from  the
tight layers of flame-retardant material.
    She gets down on her knees. The sight alone makes my dick pulse, pre-
cum leaking from  the tip before she grabs onto it. Her tongue darts out to
lick the white bead.
    My  head drops back.
    Shit, her mouth feels good.
    She traces lazy lines with her tongue across the shaft. It’s perfect. She’s
perfect. All so motherfucking perfect.
    She takes me in  her mouth, a warm,  wet heaven welcoming my  cock.
Her tongue drags along the underside of my  shaft as she pulls her mouth
back and forth. She sucks, pumps, and licks me. Sensations make my brain
short-circuit.
    She pumps me into her mouth with one hand while another grips my ass.
I regain enough mental clarity to  pull her up,  her lips popping as my dick
bobs.
    “Nope.  That’s not how this is going to go today.”
    Her  honey-brown eyes narrow. I trail  my thumb across her plump lips,
loving how she looks after sucking me off. A brief kiss wipes the frown off
her face.
    I  tug down her jeans and thong. She’s right there with me, fumbling with
taking off her sneakers. The best kind of teamwork.
    Red numbers on the clock mock me.
    “Now  you have to be quiet,” I whisper before licking the shell of her ear,
her body breaking out in goosebumps.

232
    She likes the quiet game we play, wondering who will mess up first.
    I  place her hands on the side of the gray couch. The suite is small,  not
meant for sex. But  fuck it,  I  can make the layout work  with  a little  extra
effort.
    “Keep  your hands there.” I grab a condom from my wallet.
    Thank God for planning ahead.
    I  turn back toward  Maya. The sight of  her perky ass in the air, leaning
against the arm of the couch, ready for me. Her tits hang out and her back
arches. It’s a lot to take in.  She bites down on her lip,  hitting me  with the
hungry look in her eyes as she checks out my dick.
    I  slip the condom on.
    “Too  bad your suit isn’t sex-friendly,” her voice rasps.
    “My   my, do you  have a thing for  race suits? Should I be concerned? I
can lock you away from the other drivers and keep you here for myself.”
    My  hands palm her ass, eliciting a light moan from her. One finger slides
down the crease of her ass until  I reach her slick  folds. I  plunge a  finger
inside, and then another, her wetness surrounding me.
    I  lean in close to her ear. “Always ready for me. Tell me, do you get this
way while watching me race? Does it turn you on?”
    She nods her head, the silent admission exciting me.
    “It’s  a dangerous sport. High speeds. Collisions.” I leave a path of kisses
down her spine.
    She turns her head to look at me over her shoulder.
    “I’ll    let you  in on  a secret though… Fucking  you is  the equivalent of
winning a World  Championship. I could  never win again and be perfectly
fine so long as you’re by my side. In my bed. Me inside of you. I like you a
lot.”
    She doesn’t have a second to register my words. I have the foresight to
cover her mouth with my hand before I thrust into her wet pussy. My teeth
grit together as I hold back a groan, her tight body accepting my cock  and
fisting   me  like   no   other.  Our   connected  bodies  moving   in   unison
mesmerizes me.
    And  fuck if  that doesn’t do something to me, a wave of  possessiveness
rushing through me as I drag my slick dick out, soaked to the hilt.
    She feels  tighter in  this  position, my  pants concealed because I don’t
want Santi to  hear me. I let  my  hand go from  her mouth once the shock
factor is done.

233
    Maya  claws at the fabric on the couch, a gorgeous image of her rattled
by me. I ram into her again and savor the feel of her squeezing my dick.
    She’s heaven. Perfect for me.
    My  hand grips  her ponytail, wrapping  it  around my arm, thick  strands
brushing against my skin. I tug, fulfilling  a fantasy I’ve thought about since
meeting her.
    Her body pulses at the mix of pain and pleasure. Skin warms beneath the
touch of  my other hand. I  squeeze her tit, loving  the  feel of  her pebbled
nipple beneath my palm.
    I  want her to know I’m the only one who can fuck her like this, make her
feel like this. I  want to ruin her for  any man who dares to try to come after
me.
    I  fuck her like  she’s the last woman on Earth. Because to me, she might
as well be.
    She does a good job keeping quiet, only letting out a few whimpers here
and there. I pull  on her  hair again in  a silent demand to  look at  me. She
blows me away with  a view  of her  brown eyes, hazy from lust,  matching
flushed cheeks and lips plump from my ravaging. I could  come right there
at the sight of her.
    But  I don’t.
    Because good guys finish last.
    My  grip  becomes more possessive on her hip as I pump unrelentingly
into her. I angle myself to hit her G-spot. Her whole body convulses around
me, her reaction pulling a smirk from me.
    I  stroke her special spot and give it all my attention. My dick slides back
and forth  like   never before,  her arousal encouraging  me as  my  thrusts
become sloppier, less  controlled.  It  feels  like  magic  when  she shatters
around my  cock.  Her  heavy  breathing  fills   the silent   room,  her chest
heaving up and down as she stares at me with a lazy smile.
    Her  orgasm gives me the final  push. I  thrust  into her  without holding
back, balls slapping against her ass as she takes it all. I groan as I find my
release. My  toes  curl   at  the feeling   of  her  squeezing me,  practically
pleading for more. The whole thing seems fucking poetic.
    My  lips kiss her neck as I pull out of her. I dump the condom in the trash
and situate my suit, wishing we had more time.
    Maya  keeps to the same spot, lying over the side of the couch with her
eyes closed. Her back moves to the steady rhythm of her breathing. I grab

234
her clothes from the floor, wanting  to help her in  whatever way, when she
finally speaks.
    “I  think  you’ve ruined me.” Her whispered voice rings through the quiet.
    Shit. That’s the best thing I’ve heard all day.

235
29

236
                                                    Maya






I walk into the pit  area to wish Santi good luck. Noah fucked my bad mood
right out of me, curing me from Santi’s negative words.
    “Where  did you go?” He looks at me with soft eyes and a weak smile.
    “I  took a walk. I needed a break from our conversation.”
    Can he tell Noah just fucked me? Post-sex afterglow tends to be a thing.
    “You  look like  you’ve  been crying. I’m sorry  if I  upset you. I just want
to make sure you’ll be okay and find what you love to do.”
    My  cheeks heat. Not exactly the crying he’s thinking about. His apology
makes my heart squeeze, guilt eating up any leftover lust.
    “Mm,  yeah. I appreciate it. But I am happy, and everything will be fine. I
like  following  everyone and  I’ve  made good friends.  You don’t  need to
worry about me anymore.”
    He  pulls me  in for  a hug,  our previous conversation abandoned. “You
know I love you, right?”
    My  eyes roll  with  the least amount of  effort  because his corny phrase
always gets me. I can’t hold an argument against him for more than an hour
anyway. “You tell  me all the time. I  love you  too. Now go  kick some ass.
Preferably Slade’s.”
    “Hey!  I  heard that. You both act like I’m not here.” Noah’s voice booms
over the buzz of the pit crew and machines. My body warms in recognition.
I’m so screwed with him, both literally and figuratively.
    “You’ve   won  three World Championships already. Save some for  the
little guys.” Santi’s voice carries over the other noises.
    “I’m   glad you’re not ashamed of being little. That’s mature of you. You
know  what they  say—it’s  not  about size  but  what  you  do with   it  that
matters.” Noah smirks at my brother.
    Santi groans while I bark out a laugh.
    “You’re  a piece of shit, Slade.” Santi’s words don’t  have the same kick.
“Speaking of dicks, what the hell was going on in your room? Changing up
your pre-race routine? It’s  usually  silent  but your  couch kept  hitting  the
wall, in a rhythm I  might add.” Santi’s knowing smile says it all.  My throat

237
closes tight, my brain jumping to  the worst kind of  conclusions. I let out a
breath when I find Santi not looking at me.
    Noah returns a wicked smile and shrugs. “Sorry about that. I’ll  be more
quiet next time.”
    If  the world could swallow me up whole, now would be the perfect time.
    But  it doesn’t.
    “Maybe  I need to follow  the same ritual. I wonder if that’s how you win
so much.” My brother, the idiot, smiles at Noah.
    If  I  had a drink, this  would be the moment I’d  spit  the contents out all
over my brother. Oh my God. You definitely don’t want  to, Santi. Can you
shut up already?
    My  eyes dart around the garage, avoiding eye contact at all  costs with
both of them. Santi gives me a quick peck on the head before hopping into
his car.
    Noah  and Santi wish each other good luck before they  take off for  the
grid. I stay behind in the pit area for this race, watching overhead on the TV
monitors while  Sophie hangs out with her dad. A  pit crew  member hands
me a headset so I can hear what Santi says while he races.
    Noah takes off in  first place, no surprise there. Cameras switch between
overhead shots and racer first-person cameos. Over the past few races, I’ve
caught myself cheering for him as much as I do with Santi.
    Noah drives swiftly  as he cruises along the pavement. My brother keeps
close behind, battling it out for second place with Liam. Noah holds a good
distance ahead and  avoids any  major  collisions  with   other  racers. My
brother sets a great pace, with Liam behind his rear wing. Aerodynamics of
the car make it  difficult  for  Liam  to overtake my  brother. Air  becomes a
vortex inside of the track, compromising the speed of any racer who tries to
pass the leader.
    Santi catches up to Noah, but he’s no match for Noah’s defensiveness on
this track. Noah’s  turns stay tight,  falling  right  in the  middle, making  no
racer able to surpass him. My  heart  races as Noah creates a comfortable
distance between himself and my brother.
    Commentators  go crazy  as  drivers fight   for  second- and  third-place
spots. Jax flies by Liam, pulling in close behind my brother. A pit  stop will
decide who gets out on top between them. Jax overtakes Santi at a narrow
turn, causing my brother to spin out before he regains control.

238
    Cars go  around and around, lap after  lap, rankings switching  amongst
racers. Jax gains speed on Noah, not compromising a potential first-place
win  for  McCoy. I  like   Jax’s style compared to  the boys  at Bandini.  He
makes deliberate moves  rivaling  Noah’s,  willing   to  do  anything to  get
leverage on the first-place racer.
    Noah’s  dad interrupts  me, his voice  pulling  me  away from  the TV.  I
withhold   my  sneer.  Noah  opened  up   to  me   about  his   dad’s  anger
management issues, telling me  all  about the  unknown  side of  Nicholas
Slade.
    He  takes up a spot next to me, staring up  at the TV  like  he shares my
same emotional  investment.  A  comical   display  because his  intentions
become clear once he opens his mouth.
    “You  both think you’re clever, hiding what you’re doing.”
    My  body stills but my eyes remain on the TV. Noah and Jax compete for
first place. Mechanics buzz as Noah pulls in for his pit stop, distracting me
from his dad as the team puts on his new tires. The process finishes in under
two seconds. I forget about his dad standing beside me until he fake coughs.
    “What  do  you think  Santiago and I  are doing exactly?”  I  withhold  an
urge to run away.
    His  laugh makes my skin crawl.
    Is   it  possible  to  hate  someone without  knowing   much about  him?
Because what I know is enough. Who the hell hits their child for losing kart
races? A man with a small dick and a fragile ego.
    “You’re  fucking  my  son. It’s so obvious from  watching you two  in the
pit area earlier.”
    My   neck heats up,  prickling   at the  dangerous man next  to  me.  My
fingers twirl a piece of hair to stop my fidgeting. I avert his gaze, staring up
at the TV.
    “That’s  quite  a theory. Are you  so bored with  attending races that you
need to come up with stories?” I come off way more confident than I feel.
    “You’re    a  smart   girl.   If   you   mess  around  with    Noah,  and   his
performance isn’t what I expect…”
    I  keep silent. He wants a fight that I don’t need to entertain.
    “I’ll   make sure your brother doesn’t have another contract renewal. Not
to mention  you’ll   never  walk  into  a  Bandini  suite again.  I  don’t  mess
around. I play to win.”

239
    I  turn my  head, taking in  his cold stare before returning it  with  one of
my own. His threats don’t scare me. No need to give him any semblance of
control over me.
    “Not  sure what you think  is happening. I’m  sorry you’re  worried about
Noah’s performance. But what he does out there is all on him.”  My  voice
sounds sickly sweet to my own ears.
    He  leaves with  a  smirk  on his  face, proving  to  be the asshole Noah
described.





“We need to  talk.”  Santi  lays himself  against the headboard of  my  bed,
occupying the space next to me. Yesterday was a rough day for him  after
placing fourth in the Prix. He made his rounds to appease fans, but the loss
ate away at him and he closed himself off in  the hotel suite for  the rest of
the night. Only room  service could push him to leave the four walls of  his
bedroom.
    “About?”   my voice croaks. Paranoia riddles my brain, playing tricks on
me as I  worry   if  Noah’s dad  told  Santi about  my  secret relationship. I
wouldn’t put anything past that vile man.
    “We  didn’t  have a chance to talk in private about yesterday. I came off
like an asshole and I’m sorry. A lot has been on my mind with Bandini, and
I worry about you on top of everything else.” His brown eyes pierce mine.
    “There  isn’t anything else to discuss. I get how you want what’s best for
me.” I squirm against the bedspread, unable to find a comfortable position.
    “You’ve   been kind   of  distant and  I  don’t  know   what’s going  on.  I
thought you might want to go back home, but I overstepped.”
    My  chest tightens at his sincerity. “No. That’s not it.”
    “You’d   be honest if something was bothering you, right? This  world is
hard, but I appreciate having you here. It’s made the season much better.”
    Please, stab me one more time in the heart.
    “Of   course.  You’re  my   best friend.”   A   lump  in   my  throat  makes
swallowing difficult.
    “Now  that our  feelings shit is out of the way, Netflix  came out with  the
new Stranger Things season. Let’s see it while I have free time.”

240
    I  end up watching the same season twice because guilt has a funny way
of making me do just about anything for my brother.

241
30

242
                                                    Noah






I ended up placing runner-up in  yesterday’s race. Jax put up one hell of a
fight for  the first-place spot, deserving his Prix win. The hard track and my
placement keeps me pleased with my performance.
    My  dad, on the other hand, is not.
    Regrettably, he invited me to dinner, a rare occasion since he never stays
after a race, choosing to leave as soon as he can. The whole idea of dinner
puts me on high alert. I can count on one hand the total amount of outings
we’ve had together since I joined F1.
    To  put it short, my  father deserves to be fucked right up the ass with a
tub of Icy Hot Extra Strength for lube.
    He comes off condescending to me and the waiters. My hands curl every
time he speaks to someone with a chip the size of a twenty-pound kettlebell
on his shoulder. It  takes everything in me  to not jump  over the table and
pull him by the shirt, spit in his face and rip him a new asshole to match his
personality.
    My   chest tightens at the thought of  acting similarly   to him.  I  want to
forget the countless girls, the cockiness, and my attitude. To protect myself,
I gave up bits and pieces until I was void of  feeling. Deception plays cruel
jokes on people. Turns out while I busied myself with  putting on a show, I
was the person I  lied  most to.  Eventually  I  believed all  the  deceits, the
excuses I made for my shitty attitude and moodiness, becoming the asshole
I was escaping.
    My  dad’s piss-poor attitude drives home all the points I’ve learned along
the way this year. And the worst part? I actually feel bad for my dad. I pity
him.
    Nicholas Slade has no one, using money and power to get his way, never
loving someone else. How can he when the man he adores happens to be his
own reflection? To  be honest, he doesn’t love me. Fuck,  he doesn’t even
like me,  let alone share any semblance of  the four-letter  L  word. He’s  a
selfish bastard who lives vicariously through me.
    But  to move  forward in  life,  I have to  face these issues from my past.
My  therapist will  be pleased with  how I  sit  silently, taking  deep breaths,

243
putting up with his shit.
    I  put out a lifeline for him. A  test of sorts.
    “Maya   mentioned you  chatted at  the race  together.” My   voice stays
relaxed despite a tingling sensation growing inside of me.
    “Mm,  yeah. She’s a pretty piece of ass. When are you going to drop the
bomb on Santiago? It’s a smart plan, fucking with his head before the final
Prix.”  His  grin leaves a  bitter taste in  my  mouth. How  does he sleep at
night? Restless, with a soul as black as the darkness that surrounds him.
    “She’s my girlfriend.”
    Not officially.  But he doesn’t need to know.
    He tilts  his head at me, offering a sinister smile. “If  that’s what you call
your fuck buddies now, all the power to you.”
    My  skin wants to crawl off my  body and take up shop somewhere else. I
attempt to give him a chance, waging an internal war.
    “I’m   probably going to  marry her one day. I think  she’s the one.” I say
the words with confidence.
    The idea is a little  premature, sure. But I have a good feeling about her.
Maya breathes new  life  into  me,  not wanting  to  piece me  together but
accepting all my jagged parts. Waking up next to her makes my mornings,
not because of her phenomenal blowjobs, but for the special smile she gives
me when I hit  her snooze button five times. I love  the way she lies in bed
reading books in the middle of  the day, unbothered and shooing me away
when she hits a good part. She brushes off my gruff  attitude with  a smile
and a kiss because I can  be a moody  asshole when I don’t  place first—
conditioned because of the shitty man sitting in front  of me. Most  of all,  I
like how she makes me want to be a better person. For her, for me, for the
whole goddamn world.
    My  dad gives me a tight smile. “Better  hire a lawyer for  a prenup then.
Women like   her  are  only   after  one  thing,  and  it’s   not  your   shining
personality and good looks.”
    My  façade drops. I  run out  of fucks  to give  him because he is too far
gone to help. I  made sure to prepare for this exact moment because I had
anticipated the stunt he pulled with  Maya. After  all, I’ve  watched him  for
years. I didn’t expect him to  threaten Santi’s contract because I thought he
would come after mine.
    I  let out a long exhale. He looks up at me, his dark eyes glaring at me.

244
    “After   spending time with  people who  care about me, I realized some
things. People who love you spend time with you both on and off the track.
They go to events and stay until the end to be around you because they want
to. It’s not about whether you win  or lose. I’m a World  Champion and you
treat me like a piece of shit on your shoe. Inconvenient and unwanted.”
    He  tries to say something, but I throw  up my hand to shut him up. The
upscale restaurant he chose allows us the privacy we need for this heart to
black fucking heart.
    “And  you  threaten my girlfriend? You actually fucking  told her that her
brother may lose a contract with Bandini? Like  how sad and shitty is your
life that you’d do that? I’m done trying with  you. You’ve been a crappy dad
my whole life, only caring when it benefits you. In the end, being in my life
is more about your image than about being there for me.”
    I  only pay attention to his rapid blinking and lowering my heart rate.
    “You  can’t  cut me out  when I  sponsor your team. I was serious about
Santiago’s contract renewal. Try me.” He hisses like the  fucking snake he
is.
    “Oh,  Father. The thing is I have it  all handled. Bandini no longer needs
your generous donations. I attended almost every sponsor event, meeting,
and gala held  this  year, slowly   securing enough sponsorships to outbid
yours. You’re done with  my team. Feel free to  back another group if  you
want. Not sure if they need a donor with a crappier attitude than the sewer
you crawled out of, but hell, you are a legend after all.”
    “This  isn’t  over. I’m still  a sponsor this year, so I’ll do whatever the hell
I want.”
    I  throw my  cloth napkin on the table. “I don’t  give a fuck. Do  whatever
you feel like, but stay the hell out of my way.”
    No  need to  sit  around and  spend another minute  with  this  man, my
stomach threatening to rid itself of shame and a sixty-dollar steak.
    He doesn’t bother with an apology.
    I  leave my  past behind at the table of  some fancy-ass restaurant. Fuck
him to the farthest galaxy and back because the moon is just too damn close
for comfort.

245
31

246
                                                    Maya






“Today we’re here with Santiago since he gets jealous of all the attention I
give other racers.”
    My  brother and I sit  at a sleek bar top in the Bandini motorhome. I line
up two  shot glasses next to  a bottle  of tequila  while  Santi smiles  at the
camera situated on an adjacent table.
    “Santi  admitted he’s down about not making it on  the podium the other
day. So we are going to do an exclusive episode of Tequila Talks because
we still haven’t learned tequila doesn’t fix our problems. I hope this episode
goes better than the last one. I’ll ask him a series of questions where he has
to take a  shot whenever he refuses to  answer. I end the  show after  four
because he weighs a lot and I  can’t pick  his butt  up off  the floor.  Blame
their strict workout regimen and muscle mass.”
    My  brother flexes his bicep at the camera.
    “Warning:  I didn’t  come up with  these questions. I want to clarify since
fans want answers to things I do not need to know about my brother.”  My
lips purse at the horny bunch of fans out there—way more than I expect, all
tapping away in my inbox about these guys.
    I  exaggerate a shudder at his mischievous grin and stick my tongue out
at him.
    “Favorite  thing about your sister?” I bat my lashes at him.
    “Hmm,  who came up with that question?” His brow lifts.
    I  shrug and fail to answer.
    “I  love her passion, fearlessness, and carefree personality.”
    Aw, how sweet.
    “Who  knew you had such kind thoughts about me? Okay, next question.
The worst part about F1?”
    “Hands down the fact that I don’t sleep in my bed for months at a time. I
miss coming home.”
    Ah, the not-so glam side of traveling the world.
    “What  you  really  miss is your  gym  and bubble baths.” I  smile  at my
brother.
    “Bath  bombs don’t feel the same in a hotel bathtub.” He pouts.

247
    I  suppress a laugh. “Best part of having a teammate?”
    “The    shared  points    you   get   together.  Plus,   personal   tips   and
recommendations.” Santi genuinely smiles at the camera.
    “Ugh.  I hate this one. Your favorite sex position?”
    He winks at the camera and knocks back a shot. Good answer.
    “Glad  that’s past us. Next, any special girl in your life?”
    He flips  his empty shot glass. “Not since high school.”
    “See  girls, boys  are sensitive just like  us. They  get their heart broken
once and it’s game over.”
    He chuckles to himself. “See guys, girls are annoying as ever, no matter
the age.”
    Oh, burn. “Moving  on—”
    “What’s  going on here?” Noah’s voice makes my stomach flip.
    “Tequila  Talks. Want to join?” My brother has loose lips after one shot.
    Sure enough, Noah grabs the extra glass and fills it up. He sits in the seat
next to me, ready for questions.
    My  eyes dart between Noah and Santi. “Wait, he can’t join. I don’t have
questions for him.”
    “Ask  him the same ones.” Santi offers me a quizzical look.
    “Lovely.”   My jaw hurts from my teeth grinding.
    Noah dares to look smug. All right, he asked for it.
    “If   you could go on a date with any celebrity, who  would it  be?” I give
the camera a warm smile before turning toward the guys.
    Noah coughs. I did try to stop him.
    “Definity   Taylor Hill.  That girl is fine,”  my brother blurts out.
    My   hands fidget in  front  of  me, anticipating whatever  response Noah
comes up with.
    He mutters a curse before speaking. “Hmm. Adriana Lima?”
    If  glares could kill, this man would be dead on the spot.
    “If   anyone from the VS fashion show is listening in,  please invite these
guys. It’ll make their year.”
    My  brother chuckles while Noah keeps quiet, pleasing me.
    “Favorite  F1 team besides Bandini?”
    My  brother strokes his chin as Noah takes it away.
    “McCoy   for  me.  I  like  the guys  and their  work  ethic.  They’re  great
competition, always pushing us to do our best.”

248
    “I  like  Kulikov. That’s a given from our previous history. There’s no bad
blood since I left. And the guys hustle.”
    I  move on. “Name five things you look for in your dream girl.”
    “Attractive,   smart, into  F1…”  Santi pauses. “Oh, family-oriented,  and
nice.”
    Noah takes a few  seconds to come up with an answer, his intense gaze
warming me up inside. I become fascinated with picking at the label of the
tequila bottle.
    “Beautiful,   both inside and out. Funny enough to get my  asshole sense
of humor. Someone who wants to have a family and likes me for me, rather
than for fame. And a girl who will  travel around the world with me because
this job is constantly on the go.”
    I  think my ovaries explode but it’s hard to tell. Moving on.
    “Best  sex story?”  Did  the camera catch my  cringing?  I’ll   have to re-
watch later while I edit.
    My  brother takes a breath before talking. “Well, there was this one time
—”
    My  elbow hits him in the ribs. Hell. No.
    Noah winks  at me before knocking back his shot like  the Champ he is.
Oh, what a simple wink can do to me. My lips tip up in a telling smile.
    The  game keeps going with questions taking a turn away from sex and
love interests. Bless.
    For  the first time since Santi started at Bandini, he and Noah get along.
It gives me hope that they can be friends after Noah and I come out about
our relationship.
    But  you know what they say about the best-laid plans…

249
32

250
                                                    Noah






Maya tells her brother she wants to sleep over at Sophie’s suite tonight. But
in reality, we  planned an all-nighter together after her Tequila  Talks vlog,
lying naked in the hotel bed.
    “You  know I don’t want to get with  Adriana Lima, right? I needed to say
a name.”
    She sighs. Not exactly the reaction I want.
    “Yeah.  But you’ve  been with  models like  her. That’s a lot  to compete
with when I’m nothing like  those girls.”
    My  bad decisions rear their ugly heads again. Except this time, I want to
banish them forever, no longer proud of my shitty past. Pack them away in
a cardboard box along with my bad memories.
    “Have  you googled me?” I  roll  on top of  her. My hand softly  grips her
chin, stroking her soft skin.
    “Maybe.  I was curious.” Her eyes look up toward the ceiling.
    “Google  will  be the death of me. Don’t  look  at that shit. It’s  not worth
your time  or  energy when people spin  stories to make  money.” My  lips
softly  peck at  her  cheeks between words.  “You’re.  The.  Most.  Lovely.
Woman. To. Me.”
    She giggles at all of the kisses I plant on her face. My lips find hers, my
tongue caressing her closed lips, wanting access. I fucking hate when she
closes herself off. I slide my hands down her body, wanting her to respond
to me. My hands stroke the entrance of her pussy and tease her into giving
me what I want.
    She moans when  I  dip a  finger  inside of  her, my  dick  stirring  at her
arousal. I deepen the kiss, wanting to show her how I  crave and want her.
Desire and desperation swirl inside of me. My  knee pushes her legs apart
and I roll my hard cock against her center. Her groan makes my cock pulse
against her smooth skin, her arousal coating  my dick  as I  grind into  her.
Lust makes my head cloudy, but I need to prove my point.
    “I   really like  you,  Maya. I  want to spend every day with  you,  both in
here and out there once you let me. Will you be my girlfriend? Officially?”

251
    The  way she smiles at me makes my heart skip and my dick ache. She
pulls me down for  another kiss that speaks volumes because who the hell
needs words when their body does the talking?





I struggle to stay awake at the sponsor event, another gala where lots of old
men open their big wallets. A  dime a dozen around here. With age comes
less willingness to attend these events, wanting to ditch the moment I arrive
because I have no interest in kissing ass. Not to mention how I can’t  even
have my girlfriend by my side since she hangs out with Santi.
    So I  do what any horny  male would do. I  text Maya  to meet me in the
empty ballroom next door.
    She shows up ten minutes  later, the darkness of the ballroom cloaking
her as she stands near the double-door entrance. Low lighting  makes her
shape undistinguishable.
    “Do   you  have  a  public  fetish   I  should  be  worried  about?  This  is
becoming a common occurrence for us.” Her voice sounds low and husky.
    “Why  don’t you come over and find out.”
    She strolls toward me, moving around piles of stacked chairs and empty
tables spread throughout the room.  My  lungs  welcome the  scent of  her
shampoo mixed with a light floral perfume. I could get high off the smell of
her alone.
    She tugs on my bow tie, loosening it.
    “I  love seeing you in a tux. It’s one of my favorite things.”
    I  can wear  a tux  every day if  it  makes her happy. “I  love  seeing you
naked. But this will have to do for now.” I hiss when I tug up the hem of her
lace dress. “You’re not wearing underwear? This whole time?”
    She replies with a breathy laugh.
    I  bite down  on my lip.  “Fuck  me. You can’t do  stuff like  that. If  I had
known…”
    She  shuts me up  by kissing  me. Lazy,  slow. Tantalizingly  sweet—so
fitting  for her. Her hands run down my  chest before they land on my belt.
Her hoarse voice whispers in  my  ear, my spine  tingling  at her boldness.
“We don’t need this right now.”

252
    Our  heavy breathing echoes off the walls, mixed with  my  groan as the
belt’s metal buckle hits the floor. Maya undoes my zipper slowly. My  cock
stands to attention with pre-cum seeping from the tip. She pulls my dick out
of my pants, her thumb brushing against the pearly drop.
    I  groan. “Shit.”
    “Sh.  You’re  too  loud,”  she says  before stepping away  and pulling   a
condom from her purse.
    Her preparedness makes me smile. “Thought you’d get lucky tonight?”
    “I  expected it.” Her eyes gleam at me.
    “Always   dreamed of fucking the sass out of you.” I push her up against
the wall, done with talking.
    My  lips  find  hers while my  hands stroke her core, pulling a gasp from
her. It doesn’t take much  work  with her, and I  love  it. Love  the way  she
pushes me for more. To feel, to live, to breathe her in and never let her go.
To keep Maya all to myself because fuck the world, they don’t deserve her.
Shit. I don’t either. But I can’t help my selfishness, the possessiveness I feel
around her. A desire to mark  her up and leave a trail  of  bruises from my
lips. To  bring  her  over the  edge before  pulling  her  back up,  shattering
around my dick the same way she smashes into my walls.
    She  puts the  condom on  me,  rolling  it   along my  shaft,  making  the
simplest things look erotic.
    I  lift  her  up and her legs wrap around my  waist. Maya’s thighs clench
around me, squeezing me the same way invisible hands grip my heart. But I
don’t want her to  let go. She can take over my whole life  with  a smile on
her face and I’d thank her for it. Her back hits the wall as my lips find hers,
smashing, nipping, and tugging at the soft flesh.
    I  slide into her slowly,  wanting to enjoy the sensation of the first thrust.
My  eyes close when my dick  is fully  sheathed inside of her. Her  breathy
sigh pushes me to move after what feels like a full minute of me regulating
my breathing.
    I  pull out to the tip before sliding back in with an unhurried pace.
    “Oh  God. Noah.” Her hands claw at the back of my tux.
    My  lips  move to her neck, finding the spot that drives her crazy. I suck
and mark her because I want every fucker to know she drives me wild.
    “You’re  soaked for me. Does it turn you on knowing anyone could walk
in on us right now? Find me fucking you against a wall. They might want to
watch. Shit, I would.”

253
    I  squeeze her ass when she tries to lift herself up.
    “No,”  I  growl. “I’m  in charge.”
    Thank  fuck  I  work  out every damn  day and she doesn’t weigh  much
because I don’t want to break our connection by  moving us to  a table. At
least not before her first orgasm. Turns out I tend to be selfish everywhere
but in the bedroom.
    “It’s  too much.”  Her strained voice makes my dick pulse inside of her. I
get what she means. Our relationship is more than a physical attraction, not
limited to a lust-induced fuckathon. I don’t fear the emotional tie linking us,
instead choosing to embrace it because I’m the only one who fucks her and
loves her like this.
    Love. One word I didn’t understand until Maya.
    We  intensely gaze into  each other’s eyes as I slide  in  and out of  her,
pulling a few moans from her while she tugs on my hair. Sex has never felt
this close for me. Like Maya  chips away at my exterior, leaving a piece of
herself behind forever.
    My  lazy tempo continues. I want to brand her, make her mine, drive her
as crazy as she makes me. She comes the first time when I brush against her
G-spot. I hold her while  her body shakes, gripping her ass, and not letting
go.
    I   live  for  hearing  her yell   out  my  name and bringing   her pleasure.
Obviously, I’m an egotistical bastard, but she likes me anyway, so be it.
    I   eventually increase my  pumping,  hitting  her in  all  the  right  places
while I  struggle to  keep my own  orgasm back. She needs to come again
because I crave it more than my own. Like chasing a high.
    “Yes. Just like that. Fuck, Noah.” Her hands run through my hair and tug
at the root. I  love how  she tells me what she enjoys, encouraging me and
feeding my self-esteem all at once.
    “You’re  stunning when you come. I don’t  know if  I’ve seen anything as
perfect.” I leave a searing kiss on her plump lips.
    I  carry her to an empty table nearby that looks sturdy enough, needing to
adjust my angle. One of my hands finds her clit  while  the other palms the
material over her breasts.
    “Do.  Not. Stop,” she says between my thrusts.
    I  groan at her request, my dick throbbing inside of her at the desperation
in her voice.  My  pace becomes quicker and messier. A mix  of  her pants

254
with my  deep inhales ring in my  ears. Her eyes meet mine, half open and
hazy, a masterpiece of lust and love.
    And  with a few sweet words of encouragement, she explodes around my
dick again, milking me. Her nails scratch at the material of my tux. Fuck if
that’s not sexy.
    My  dick slides easily in and out of her, her arousal coating me. I increase
the pressure and pace. Hurried thrusts match my limited sense of control,
becoming more rushed with each push. My heart beats rapidly in my chest.
I detonate inside of  her with  a roar  of  pleasure, my spine tingling  at my
release. Lazy pumps until I have nothing left to give.
    My  body relaxes and I lie on top of her, both of us catching our breath.
    “I   think you  shave off a year of  my life  every single week,”  her voice
croaks.
    “What  a year well spent.”
    Her chest shakes under me, and I smile into her neck.
    We  both take care of  ourselves. I  help smooth out  her hair while  she
fixes my bow tie. We’re quite the pair, she and I.
    “I   have one last request.” I  grab her  hand. She glances up at me, her
curiosity apparent. “Will you dance with me?”
    She nods her head enthusiastically while shooting me a radiant smile.
    I  pull  up the music-streaming app on my phone before placing it down
on one of the tables. Thomas Rhett’s “Die  a Happy Man”  croons through
the tiny speakers, loud enough for us to hear. My hand grabs hers as I pull
her toward an empty area. With one hand on the small of her back and the
other wrapped around her hand, I sway us to the music.
    This  is the best I can get for now since we can’t dance together in public
yet. The moment feels fitting after the sex we shared, her head lying against
my chest as we move around in  a small circle.  I  kiss the top of  her head
before I spin her around.
    She  unabashedly throws her head back and  lets out  a sultry  laugh.  I
make it a goal to make her laugh like that every single day of the rest of my
life. She turns me into a sappy motherfucker who can’t  help it around her,
endlessly searching for ways to make her happy and satisfied.
    I  gather up courage as the song continues because I want to let her know.
Because I never want another day to go by without her hearing it.
    “I  love you.”  My voice rasps over the music.

255
    Maya  always looks beautiful to me. But the moment I admit I  love her?
She gives me what is hands down the most gorgeous smile I’ve ever seen,
one meant only for me.
    I  keep saying that. But I’ll never forget this one.
    “I  love you, too.” Her voice carries over the sweet melody.
    I  pull her in  close after she says the three words I’ve wanted to hear for
weeks, committing the moment to memory.

256
33

257
                                                    Maya






Brazil. Home of Noah’s beloved Adriana Lima.
    I’m   joking.  No more  bitter feelings  about that comment since Tequila
Talks was a few weeks ago. I’m  more mature than that. Plus, Noah loves
me. Back in the ballroom,  he caught me off guard, looking  excited to  say
those three words. Now he never goes a day without saying them.
    Lying  to my brother about my current whereabouts fills me with dread. I
let him know  this morning that I was flying  to Brazil  earlier than expected
with Sophie, telling him  we want to explore Rio de Janeiro together before
the next Grand Prix. My lie isn’t  too far off from  the truth. See, I am in Rio
de Janeiro…but I’m actually here with Noah.
    Shocker. I know.
    But  we have a week off  between the last race and the Brazilian Grand
Prix. We came to the country early, enjoying the trip he planned. He shows
me how he  cares, doing sweet things that  make me appreciate him even
more. Like buying me one of every candy bar when I got my period and sex
was off the table. Or how he made sangria when I felt homesick, which led
to us getting drunk and playing another round of two truths and a lie.
    I  carry  my  camera around while  we  wander through  Brazil’s  streets,
filming  private moments of us. Nothing  like the hustle and bustle of a big
city. Noah shows an interest in my camera, asking people to take photos of
us, claiming he wants memories of  our first  trip  together. He hates every
camera except my own. I  can’t  imagine being  famous, not being able  to
enjoy fundamental privacy.
    We both dress up, currently incognito because avoiding fans has become
our new day job.  I don’t  want pictures of  us out there on  the internet. At
least not identifiable ones, so I put myself in charge of the outfits.
    “Is   the  fake  mustache  really  necessary? It’s   kind  of   itchy.”   Noah
scratches his face for the fourth time today. I hate to say it,  but mustaches
don’t suit him, especially not the handlebar kind.
    “Stop  your  complaining.  I’m  the one wearing  an Albrecht  team shirt.
They’re like  the worst in the whole F1 circuit  so I  got the short end of the
stick.”

258
    His  throaty laugh makes me chuckle along with him.
    Noah taps the brim  of my hat. “I  told  you to wear the wig  instead. You
refused.”
    “It’s  hot outside and wigs get scratchy.” I don’t even know why I bought
that atrocity. It makes me look like a porn star, and not exactly the well-paid
kind.
    “We’ll   have to save it for another day.”
    Noah’s heated smile sends a shiver down my spine. He kisses my neck
at the bottom  of  the Christ  the Redeemer steps, people pushing past us,
grumbling in Portuguese.
    “You   have  lots  of   kinks.  I’m   not  sure  I   would’ve   agreed to  this
relationship if I  had known all this beforehand.” I  step away from him and
give him a one-armed shrug. His sexual appetite alone leaves me sore for
days because once is never enough with this man.
    He  smacks my ass while we  climb  to visit  the statue. By the  time we
reach the top, my lungs ache and my legs wobble.
    “You  never look  this sweaty after sex with  me. Am  I not  working you
hard enough?” Noah’s smile matches the mischievous shine in his eye.
    I  shoot him a half-assed glare. “Not all of us like to visit  the gym at five
in the morning. This is the most I’ve worked out all year.”
    He shakes his head at me. “Don’t discount all the times I’ve fucked you.
Better than any cardio you’ll do at a hotel gym.”
    “Look  at you solving all of my  problems.” I genuinely smile up at him.
    My  phone rings, vibrating inside of my leggings’ pocket. I may not work
out but at least I look the part.
    “Let   me take this.  It’s  Santi.”  I  walk  away before  Noah protests. He
stays put, checking out the view while I sit on a bench.
    “Hola,   hermana. You forgot  to check  in earlier.”  Santi’s voice  carries
through the small speaker.
    My  hand holding the phone shakes as uneasiness settles in my stomach.
“Sorry about that. We got busy.” Not a lie per se.
    “How’s  the weather over there? Heard a storm may be coming in before
the race.”
    The  sun shines down  on me,  not a  cloud in  sight.  I  hang out  in  the
shadow of one of Christ’s open arms, which is ironic since I’m lying  to my
brother.

259
    “Don’t   worry  about that  because it’s bright  and sunny here. You  still
have a few days before you need to come over anyway.”
    “How’s  little  miss Sophie doing?”
    “Good.”  I  choke on the word. “Hanging out  at the famous statue before
visiting Sugarloaf Mountain.”
    I  promise once this season is over, I will   tell the  truth no matter what.
Noah tells  me  how  much  he wants  to  date me  after  the  season ends.
Hopefully, my relationship with  him is worth  the nausea I feel every time I
lie to my brother.
    “Well  lucky  you’re having a good time. Noah stood me up at a sponsor
event, which meant I had to spend five hours talking to people by myself. I
hated every second of it.”
    My  chest tightens. “Oh, no.” Wow, Maya. Please act less surprised.
    “Yeah, no  shit ‘oh, no.’  He acts tough and entitled, too good to pick up
the phone and let me know  he wouldn’t  be saving my ass from  dead-end
conversations. But whatever, I survived.”
    The three of us need another tequila bonding session.
    “At   least you love those types of events. Sucks he didn’t show.”  Sucks
he was in bed with me while you were schmoozing. I might as well shower
in holy water to cleanse myself from my deception.
    “Yeah,  maybe for  the first  hour. But  I  can’t  even take a piss  without
someone asking me a question about the season or my teammate.”
    I  laugh at the mental picture Santi paints me. “Well, I better get going.”
    “Right.  Your travel buddy has replaced me.”
    Santi clenches a fist around my heart without knowing it.
    I  fight to get the words out. “Never, you’re always my number one.”
    “I  better be. Catch you later.” He hangs up the phone.
    Noah grins at me from across the cobbled platform. I offer a weak smile
and a small wave, taking  deep breaths to ease the tension building in my
head.
    I  hope all this  worry is  worth it  because unlike Noah, I don’t  welcome
trouble with open arms and a kiss.

260
“You disappeared three times already tonight. You even abandoned me with
Charles Wolfe. Of  all people, that’s  low, Maya.”  Santi’s voice  comes out
whiny.
    I   shoot him  a sweet smile  and  shrug my  shoulders. He dislikes  that
sponsor, sharing how the guy gets drunk and has a preference for hugging it
out. Brown eyes glare down at me with a hint of amusement.
    “I’m   sorry. I  got distracted.” I  bring  my drink  up to  my lips  because I
have to keep my hands busy. If not, my nervousness will give me away.
    “You’ve  been more than that lately.  I’ll  have to talk  to Sophie because
she takes up too much of your time, making me feel needy and jealous.”
    He fails to notice me choking on my drink.
    Way to keep it cool, Maya.
    He continues, oblivious to my internal struggle. “It’s  getting out of hand.
Give me my sister back already. We only have two  races left and I barely
see you anymore. Not even at the press conferences.”
    “Well,  those get boring. I almost fell asleep at one…standing up, I might
add.” I don’t include how Noah had kept me up for hours the night before.
    His  cold gaze assesses me while he remains silent.
    “I’ll    spend the rest of the night  by your  side. I’ll   even help you avoid
Charles; I don’t think he likes me very much anyway.” I link my arm in  his,
ignoring how my throat feels like I chugged sand.
    “You  better. He hugged me twice, his sweaty face rubbing against mine.
Feel pity for your older brother.” Santi winces.
    I  rub his arm in  assurance. “Aw, poor baby. I’m here now and I’ll  keep
an eye out for him.”
    Not  soon after, Noah finds me again. But this time  he frowns when his
eyes land on Santi next to me. His eyes scream trouble. The delicious kind
of trouble, but trouble nonetheless with my brother here. I subtly shake my
head from side to side in hopes of discouraging his advances. His lips tip up
at the corners.
    “Noah,  good to see you, man. It feels like you barely hang around these
things. You missed Charles today. He hugged me.” My brother gives Noah
the usual guy hello: hands shaking, backs being clapped.
    Guilt  eats me alive like a corroded battery in the pit of my stomach. How
does Noah keep his face neutral all the time? I need to set up a meeting with
Bandini’s PR manager because I can use some insider tips.

261
    “Yeah,  these events  haven’t  been doing  it  for   me lately.  Especially
Charles. He’s a nice guy, but a bit touchy.” He smirks at my brother.
    We both know what has been doing it for him lately.
    Spoiler:  it isn’t Charles or winning races.
    Even though Noah wins most of  the races anyway. Commentators think
Noah may be the best of our  generation and F1 history. Fans obsess over
him, attending races with huge posters, some including women’s numbers.
They line up for hours to get him to sign their stuff. Boobs not included.
    My  brother  and Noah chat while  I insert random comments that come
off half-assed at best. Noah and his nearness distract me. His tux makes me
lightheaded, the   look   of  his   roguish  smile   muddles  up  my   insides.
Thankfully Santi doesn’t notice anything. I’ll  tell  him soon enough because
I can’t take the lying anymore.
    Soon after, Santi and I  call it  an early night,  wanting to get extra sleep
before the qualifiers.
    For  the first time  in a while,  I stay with  Santi because of his admission
about being lonely. He does so much for  me, and I  lie  to him,  keeping a
secret hidden that he should be aware of.
    I  don’t sleep a wink. Instead, I end up tossing and turning, never finding
a comfortable position. Turns out sleep is for the innocent.





“I  don’t  like  the way  he looks at  you,”  my brother  growls before  taking
another sip of his beer. Noah stares at us across the pit lane, smiling before
turning back toward a man he’s talking to.
    Noah  sucks at keeping his cool. He’s already talked to  us twice at this
kid’s event, a kart race fundraiser for children with cancer. When Santi and
I hopped in two  karts, Noah decided to join,  claiming he wanted to spend
time with his teammate.
    Preferably the teammate he spends his nights with.
    And   damn him  for  making  my  heart melt  onto  the  pavement as he
played with kids,  throwing them in  the air and catching them. A  total dad
move that makes my ovaries happy.
    My   brother stares at  him,  dark eyebrows tipped  down  as his fingers
clench around his beer bottle.

262
    He  glances over at  me. Crap.  I  forgot  he said something  in  the first
place.
    “He  looks at everyone that way. Don’t bother getting annoyed.” I take a
sip of my water, wishing to chug Santi’s beer instead.
    “No,   he  doesn’t.  His  eyes stay  on  you  too  long.  I   might  tell  him
something because you’re my sister, and he’s a  manwhore who needs to
keep his hands to himself.”
    My  brother is about fifty orgasms too late on his threat.
    “You’re   making excuses because you want to  like  him,  but you  both
have a dumb rivalry.”
    Some may call it  a stretch, but they bonded over tequila. If that doesn’t
scream future friends, I don’t know what does.
    He  grumbles under his  breath. “Thank  God you’re  not  into guys  like
him.”
    Should I be afraid of how often my chest constricts around Santi?
    “Why?”  I  whisper.
    “Do   you  really   need another reason  besides the fact  that  he  fucks
everything that walks?”
    I  fail  to  hide how my  body cringes, but he  misses it, too enthralled in
glaring at Noah. Santi’s words stab at my armor and leave me bleeding.
    “Well,   people change. I don’t  want to  cast judgments when he’s been
nice to me this  season.” I tip  my chin  up and cross my arms. People can
only walk all over your heart if you let them.
    Santi  lets out  a bitter  laugh.  “This  is  one of  the  reasons I love  you.
You’re  innocent  and trusting  of   the  world  and  the  people in   it.”   His
statement makes my heart deflate like a balloon.
    “Maybe  you  need to trust  your teammate more instead of  looking  for
everything wrong with  him.  You can learn  something from me.”  Woah. I
have no idea where those words came from.
    Santi  stares at me, unblinking  and unmoving.  He  changes the subject
after chugging the rest of his drink. But  the air around us remains heavy, a
dark cloud looming over me, guilt hitting me like hail.

263
34

264
                                                    Noah






It takes everything in  me to not  explode. I grind  my teeth and clench my
fists as my feet stomp  across the pavement, coming face to face with my
father.
    And  look, he brought a film crew.
    “Noah,  just  the man  I  was looking  for.  Sports Daily  wanted  to do  a
special on   me,  marking  the   twentieth  anniversary  of  my   last  World
Championship win.”  His  sinister smile makes a chill  run  down my  spine
like my nerves know what a slimy piece of crap he is.
    My   head nods along  like  I  give  a shit.  Cameras film  me, making  it
impossible to hide my scowl  at the unwanted attention, unlike any type of
filming  Maya does. My  dad surprises me by coming  back after I  chewed
him out  during our dinner  a month ago. He disregards how I  told  him to
stay the hell away from me because he never does anything I ask. Lucky me.
Looks like I got my listening skills from  my dad.
    “Excited  to compete in the Brazilian  Grand Prix tomorrow?”  His bright
smile doesn’t reach his eyes.
    “Sure.”  My lips remain a tight line, the least bit interested in this chat.
    I  manage to walk  one step away before he  pulls me in,  his  thick arm
wrapping around my shoulders and holding me in place.
    “Want  to  tell  the cameras how you’ve  been preparing for  your racing
lately? Fans wonder what makes you tick, what makes a winner stand out
from the  rest. Interesting strategy of  taking  a whole week  off  before the
race.” His  eyes glint in  the sunlight.  I  hate the look  on his  face, a smug
smile meant to intimidate and control me.
    “Just  the  usual, resting  and prepping  while  keeping to  my  schedule.
Don’t want  to mess with perfection.”  A  weak smile breaks out across my
face as I shrug my dad’s arm off me.
    “You  better be  careful. Don’t  want  secrets getting out about how  you
win races.” His sly smile makes my stomach roll.
    I   step away  from   the  bright  lights  of   the camera,  putting  distance
between my  jackass of   a  father  and me.  First,  the  issue  with  Santi’s
contract, and now  he  threatens me. A   never-ending cycle  with  us.  Me

265
pushing, him   punching.  A  screwed-up  relationship  that  will   never  be
normal, but thank fuck I have new sponsorships and a fresh start.
    His  game doesn’t  interest me,  and for  once, my  decisions can affect
someone else. I  feel  like  an  idiot  for  telling   him  about  Maya and  me
because the way he looks at me tells me this thing  with  us won’t be over
until he says it is. The ultimate control freak. And worse, he gets off on it.
    Fuck me, I really screwed up this time.

266
35

267
                                                    Maya






A rainy race day. The worst kind of news for drivers and fans alike.
    Roads  shine, slick  from  the  downpour, which   means tires will   have
limited traction. Less than ideal conditions pose a threat to drivers. It takes a
lot of  skill to  successfully navigate cars with limited visibility   and grip on
the road.
    The  pit  crew  scurries about with  a nervous  buzz as they  prepare the
spare parts needed for  the cars. Extra  pieces lay  outside for  any  minor
crashes, just in case the Bandini boys have a collision.
    Santi and Noah discuss game plans with Sophie’s dad. I linger, getting in
the way of random mechanics who kindly work  around me, not asking me
to move until  I knock  over a power drill.  They escort me to the computer
area where I can wreak less havoc. Sophie sidles up to me.
    “My   dad bet fifty  bucks that  Albrecht doesn’t make it  past thirty  laps.
Want in?”  Her green eyes shine, complementing  her tan skin.  She rocks
French braids, a jean skirt, and another slogan T-shirt.
    I  chuckle. “Do you ever learn from bets?”
    “No.   That’s why  I  bet they  wouldn’t  make it  past seventy laps.”  She
blows a pink bubble before popping it.
    “There are only seventy-one laps.”
    “Exactly.  My dad raised a smart cookie.” She taps her temple, sporting a
megawatt grin featuring her two dimples.
    The  drizzling  rain let  up, allowing  drivers to  compete, but not enough
for the roads to dry on their own. Sophie’s dad announces how the race will
start in  twenty  minutes.  Noah  and Santi  meet  with  engineers near the
entrance of the garage, reviewing  driving  strategies for  these conditions,
both men in  my life  working  together. Once the crew  gives the all-clear,
Santi comes to our spot in the computer bay.
    “It’s   going to be fine.  You worry  too much lately. Just a little  sprinkle,
like a sun shower.” Santi pulls me in for a hug.
    Wet  ground mocks me. I  give the  rain a death stare like  I can change
Mother Nature’s mind.

268
    “I   wish  they  didn’t  make  you  race in  these conditions.  It’s  kind   of
dangerous. I think of Albrecht crashing every time.”
    Santi  chuckles. “They   wouldn’t  let  us race  if  the  risk  was that  bad.
Nothing more than the usual kind, like  crashing into barriers with minimal
damage.”
    “They  prep for  this. Plus, my dad will  chat away with  them, giving the
best possible advice.” Sophie flicks a braid over her shoulder.
    I  give  them a tight  smile.  “Be  safe out there. I’ll   have headphones to
hear everything with the Bandini team.” I  leave out the part where I’ll  also
tune into Noah’s radio.
    “Atta  girl.  We’ll see you soon.” He taps my hat with his car number.
    I  wave at Noah over Santi’s shoulder, wishing I could hug him before he
goes out there.  Our secret is  wearing  on me  and messing up  my  sleep
cycles. Two races left until I  can tell Santi everything, and I’m  praying for
the best reaction because he gets rattled easily.
    Noah offers me a glorious smile before getting into his car.
    “Damn   girl,  I  don’t  know  how  you ended up  with  that  one. Sex  on
wheels.” Sophie winks at me except it comes off like a twitch.
    I  let out my first laugh of the day.
    Nothing  special happens during the beginning of the race. The grid has
Liam in P1, with Noah, Jax, and my brother following behind. I don’t know
how the other teams don’t  get bored being on the back of  the grid.  But I
guess they live their best lives anyway, happy to compete and do what they
love every day. F1 calls them the “best of the rest.”
    The  racers take  off,  a  few  cars skidding  and sliding   across the wet
pavement. Thankfully, both the McCoy  and Bandini teams make it  out of
the grid perfectly intact. Our boys drive  down a narrow straight with  Liam
in the lead. Sophie smiles and claps her hands together when Noah fails to
overtake him.
    Bad news rings through the radio and television. Santi turns rapidly, and
with the slick  roads, he crashes during a tight turn. His car stalls next to a
barrier wall with  the left wheel  dislodged and rolling away. He retires as a
one-lap wonder.
    My   brother lets out his  frustrations on camera. The radio  buzzes with
chatter as Sophie’s dad calms him down, soothing him like a parent would
during a child’s tantrum. What a sucky job to work with hot-headed drivers.

269
    “My   dad  deals with  anger like  a  champ; no  wonder  he handled my
teenage rage so well,” Sophie mumbles.
    “He   puts up  with  these two  all  season long so his  patience must be
endless.”
    I  try to imagine Sophie’s teen outbursts, resembling something along the
lines of Tinkerbell stomping her foot.
    My  eyes remain glued on the television. “Santi’s going  to be pissed for
retiring early.”
    Santi stands next to his car, the camera crew catching him smacking the
red metal frame.
    The  safety car drops my  brother off  in  the garage ten minutes later. I
give him a quick hug and some words of encouragement before he heads on
up to his suite, claiming he needs a break and meditation. My heart hurts at
how defeated he looks, his shoulders hunched over as he disappears.
    Sophie nudges me. “That went better than expected, no thrown helmets
or dramatic sweeping of tools off a rolling cart.”
    “Does anyone else comment on your vivid imagination?”
    “Duh,  Liam—all  the time.  Says I should write stories and make money
off my madness.” She nods like she has considered the idea.
    Liam  and Noah  fight  for the  first-place spot. They  each pull off  risky
moves, trying to get around each other. Anticipation and nerves mix around
inside  of  me.  A   few   times  their  tires   lose  traction,  but  they  regain
momentum, pulling back onto the track  before they stall. Liam’s  car spins
out once as he expertly  misses a barrier and gains enough force  to keep
driving. Another ten laps to go. Noah attempts to overtake Liam at the turn,
but the road looks too wet.
    My  stomach rolls at the live coverage, a helpless witness to the noise of
crunching metal and squealing tires, and the  gasps from the pit.  Sophie’s
dad yells into his radio, but his words are hard to make out.
    Liam’s  front  wing  and tire clip  the underside of Noah’s car. My  blood
pumps loudly in my ears, making it impossible to hear shit out of the radio.
I’m  silently sitting  on the  edge of my seat as time slows  down, frame by
frame, and the crash happens.
    Noah’s  car flips  on  its side  and proceeds to barrel roll.  Once.  Twice.
Three fucking  times.  It  bounces again  before  it  drags across the  road,
slamming into the  barrier at an estimated one hundred and seventy miles

270
per hour. Holy  shit.  The complete underside of  his  car is  exposed, tires
spinning and liquid leaking down the metal.
    Tears flood   my  eyes at  Noah’s lack  of  response to  any  radio calls.
Wetness streams down my face. Sophie’s dad speaks into the radio, the only
voice in the quiet garage.
    Smoke  billows   from  Noah’s  car  despite the  drizzling  rain.  It   rises,
darkening the air above him. More  silence from  the radio. Orange flames
lick at the red paint of the Bandini car, marring it, making it look all wrong.
    Noah speaks into the radio.
    “Fuck,  there’s a  fire. I’m   upside down. Please get me the fuck  out of
here! Now!”  My heart sinks at his heavy breathing, his voice betraying his
fear.
    Flames engulf  the cockpit of  the car. Bile  builds up in  the back of  my
throat, my body fighting with everything to keep it down.
    Sophie’s dad speaks into his microphone. “They’re  on their  way. Keep
calm, Noah! We’ll  get you out  of there. Take a few deep breaths. They’re
bringing the fire extinguishers now.”
    “Where  the  fuck  is  the safety  team? The crane? My   suit is  on  fire!
There’s a shit-ton of smoke coming from the car, making it hard to breathe.”
His labored breaths garble the radio.
    Sophie’s  dad takes control  of  the situation  and asks if  Noah has any
injuries. My heart throbs at the panic laced in his voice.
    I  can’t do anything  but watch. I  am helpless, out of control. The safety
team finally  shows  up with  fire  extinguishers,  white foam  pouring  over
Noah’s car, running down the red paint like a cloud. They control the flames
in record time, but it still  feels like forever. I  tune out the commentators on
the television.  My  legs move  on their  own  accord, sitting  myself  down
before my knees buckle.
    The crew brings a crane to dislodge Noah’s car from the barrier.
    I  sob at his desperate pleas to be let out, upset about how long it takes.
God, it  feels  like  torture.  Knowing   he feels  weak, knowing   I  can’t  do
anything but sit, watching the safety team do everything. Not being able to
help the person I love is ten levels of fucked up.
    I  take a  deep breath when the crane lifts  his car. His  body crawls out
from under the hunk of metal with the help of crew members. An image I’ll
never get  out of   my  head. He  throws his  helmet  across the  grass, the

271
headpiece bouncing around, body shaking as he takes in a lungful of fresh
air.
    Invisible  needles pinch at my heart, watching him get upset on the grass.
He lies there vulnerable, no longer his usual tough, competitive, and brave
self. Tears run down my face, mimicking the ones on TV. No privacy during
a time like this.
    My  sad tears turn into ones of relief  as the safety team checks him out,
giving  the all-clear.  It’s  sheer luck  to walk  away  from  a crash like  that
unharmed.
    Sophie hugs me, her arms squeezing me tight, the smell of coconuts and
summer wrapping around me. My  nose runs and my vision  clouds as the
safety team drives Noah away from the crash.
    “He’ll   be okay. The cars are built for  these types of things, plus there’s
all the new safety precautions.”
    I  give Sophie another hug, grateful for her friendship in a time like  this.
My body freezes at Noah’s voice. I push Sophie away and hurl myself into
Noah’s arms.
    His  body tenses before his arms wrap around mine, not giving a shit who
watches. He breathes in  the scent of  me,  tears springing from   my eyes
again, hitting me with all types of emotions. I cry  into his chest as he holds
my shaking body close to him.
    “I  was terrified. I’m  glad you’re okay,” I mumble into his chest.
    “I’ll    always be okay and come back to  you. Those cars are built for  a
bomb. I love you.” He squeezes me as he whispers the words in my ear.
    I  take  another deep breath, Noah’s terrible  smell  invading  my  lungs.
Like a mix  of burnt rubber, smoke, and sweat. I try not to gag as I hold on
to him.
    Once I  calm  down, I  pull  away from  him  and assess for any injuries.
Besides his flushed cheeks, he appears okay. Thank God.  His hazy  eyes
look down at me, shining under the fluorescent lighting.
    I   let  out   a long   sigh.  My   spine straightens  at  the  buzzing  of  pit
equipment. After everything  today, I  need to talk to  Santi. With  one race
left, he deserves the truth because I care about both of my Bandini boys.
    We pull away from each other and my eyes fall to the floor.
    The slate color looks fascinating.
    I  toe it with  my sneakers while everyone congratulates Noah for making
it out safely. His chuckle bounces off the garage walls. Needing a moment

272
to collect  myself, I  head toward  the suites, telling  him  I need to  use the
bathroom.

273
36

274
                                                    Noah






Today’s crash is single-handily the worst one of my F1 career. Even nastier
than Abu Dhabi two years ago. I hope they don’t release the radio tapes for
my sake because what an embarrassment.
    Maya left  ten minutes ago, not returning after saying she needed to go to
the bathroom. That should have been the first warning sign that something
wasn’t right. She would’ve come back after my shitty crash.
    A   cold feeling  trails  up  my spine  as I  head up the  stairs toward  the
private suites.
    I  walk  into the hall, confronted with  Maya’s tear-stained face, an angry
Santiago, and my sneering father. Leave it to  my dad to have impeccable
timing. Calculated, waiting  for  the perfect moment for  my defenses to be
down, and I can’t do anything to stop him.
    I  dread looking  at Maya. Her eyes hold mine  for a  second before they
shift, looking back at Santi.
    “Noah,  just  the man I  was searching for. You  must be busy after  that
little  tumble.  But  I   was catching  up  with  Santiago,  giving  him  a  few
pointers, ways to do better on rainy days.”
    My  fists clench at the sight of my gloating father. I thought I had already
hit rock bottom,  but man was I  wrong. The man who disgusts me leers at
me.
    “I’d    like  to  speak to  Santiago and Maya  alone  if  you  don’t  mind.”
Because I sure as fuck mind  my dad standing here, getting off  on  all the
drama.
    Tension cloaks the room.  Uncomfortable, unwelcomed, and so fucking
wrong on a day like today.
    “Actually,   I  thought we  could  all  chat about the final   Championship,
mainly because you’re coming out about your relationship. How mature of
Santiago to be okay with all of this.” My dad nods his head at Santiago.
    My   stomach drops  at  the surprise  etched on  Santiago’s face.  Maya
covers her face with her hands, red creeping from her neck to her checks.
    “Shut  up.”  I glare at the man who  is dead to me. Finished. Done. For-
fucking-ever.

275
    Santiago’s head whips from  my  face to Maya’s and back  to mine. His
fists ball up as he puts the pieces together. He eats up the distance, pushing
me against the wall, his fists gripping  my race suit. Up close and personal
with  his flared  nostrils  and sharp eyes. I  don’t  put up  a fight  because I
deserve this  and  more.  He  presses my  body  into  the  wall,   my  arms
remaining flat against my sides.
    “You  fucked my sister?” His words pass through gritted teeth.
    I  hate how pissed he looks, how  his lips  curl and his  cheeks redden. I
hate causing him pain even though I love his sister.
    “Look   at that, nothing  like  team bonding.”  My  dad’s voice drips  with
appreciation.
    I  don’t  need to look  over Santi’s shoulder to know  how much my  dad
enjoys this. Why  use Viagra  when he has a  lifetime  supply of  drama to
satisfy his urges?
    “How  could you? I  bring her along, hoping you’re nice to her instead of
your usual asshole self, and what? You  screw around with  her like  she’s
nothing and then get her to lie to me. Is that your kink? Fucking up families
because you come from a shitty one?”
    Maya  groans as she tugs on Santi’s shoulder. “Stop, Santi. It’s  not his
fault I lied. I didn’t  want to tell you, not him. Let go.”
    Santi  doesn’t budge. He glares at me, his fingers twitching  as he grips
my suit, itching  to hit  me. I recognize the look  from my  father. But I’m  a
big boy, I can take it.
    “Why   only beat you on the track  when he can get in your  head just as
much?” My  dad lays  it  on thick,  twisting  everything special I  have with
Maya, selling his dirty story to my teammate.
    Santi’s fists  tighten. I wait  for him  to take a hit, anything to  put me out
of my misery. I despise how upset Maya is. Her eyes are red and puffy, her
skin a sickly color as she watches us.
    “I   didn’t  fuck around with  her. I love  her. I’ll  keep loving  her through
everything, no matter what you or anyone else says, or whatever you try to
do to break us up. It’s insulting  for you  to even think I’d  be with  Maya to
fuck around with your racing. She’s the end game. I don’t hook up with her
for a shitty  trophy, and sure as fuck  not for  a Championship win.  I  want
everything with her. Everything after this.”
    Maya  takes a deep inhale, her eyes wide as she looks at me. I smile at
her, even though I have a raging Santi pegging me against a wall, a second

276
away from decking me in the face.
    “You’re  a piece of shit. I  trusted you. And you—”  he looks at Maya for
the first  time over his  shoulder while  he holds me—“I’m   disappointed in
you.” Those four words do Maya in, her eyes leaking fresh tears.
    “Don’t   take this  out on  her. Please,” my  voice croaks, “blame  me.” I
don’t mind  begging if it  saves Maya from her  heart smashing all over the
Bandini suite floor.
    The most honest moment of my life.
    “Seriously, all  this drama for a stupid cunt?”
    Santi’s hands drop me. His reflexes startle me, turning  in a blur of  red.
The sound of flesh meeting flesh reverberates off the walls. It all happens in
a second. My father clutches his face with a fired-up Santiago standing over
him. In all my years, I’ve never hit him, but for once, someone has.
    “You’re  a  piece of shit. No  one talks about my  sister that way. Ever. I
don’t care who the fuck you were, but I know  the sad excuse of a man you
are now, and let me tell you, you don’t live up to the hype.”
    No  words come from my mouth while Maya stares at the two of us.
    Santi’s  body shudders, his self-control wavering.  “Maya,  let’s go.”  He
grabs onto her hand like a child.
    My  heart clenches as fear pumps through my veins, unable to handle her
rejection if   she finds  this  relationship  not worth  the  trouble,  not  worth
pissing off her brother, not worth a risk flooded with cons and promises that
have yet to be followed through on.
    Except her feet remain cemented to the floor.
    “No.”
    A  simple word fills me with  hope.

277
37

278
                                                    Maya






No more lies, no more secrets, and sure as hell no more people telling me
what to do or how to live my life.
    My  brother’s eyes flare. His mouth opens, but I hold up a finger, needing
to talk before I lose courage.
    “Santi,  I’m   sorry  for  lying  to  you  and keeping my  relationship  with
Noah a secret. I…I  love  him.  And I  don’t  want  to hide  it  anymore, like
something shameful because it’s nothing close to that. I  need to grow up,
and you need to let me. Mistakes included. Not that I think  this is one, but
no matter what happens, I can’t live  my life  worrying  about disappointing
you, or Mami y Papi, or even myself. I love you, but I need to take a chance
on my relationship, and you have to accept it.”
    Words  rush out of  my  mouth, raw  and unfiltered like  my  feelings for
Noah. Santi gazes at me in disbelief.
    He shocks me. His arms wrap around my body, pulling me in for  a hug,
as he mumbles into my  ear, “I’m  so fucking  proud of  you. But  also, I’m
pissed as fuck. To  find  out your  secret from this  dipshit  on the floor,  to
know my teammate crossed boundaries…definitely not over it. But I  want
to be  happy for   you  because you deserve everything  in  the world   and
more.” He lets me go.
    His  eyes shine under the suite lighting. “Don’t ever lie to me again. And
you—” he points at Noah—“You  better do right by  my sister. If you  make
her cry, I swear I’ll make you regret ever being born from your crappy dad.”
He looks down at Nicholas Slade who has yet to sink back into  the pits of
hell—from where he came.
    My  brother walks away. Secrets no longer get in our way, eating me up
inside. I  let  out  a shaky breath,  my lungs  no  longer cut  off  from  fresh
oxygen.
    Noah’s  dad stands, his usual bravado  absent except for malice  in  his
eyes.
    Noah  takes over, stepping between his dad and me. “You’re no  longer
welcome here  with  Bandini.  If   you  come  around again,  I’ll   have  you
banned. We’re done. Don’t call me, don’t text me, and for fuck’s sake, don’t

279
talk to Maya  or her family.  Go spend your sad existence somewhere else.
It’s over. We’re over.” Noah’s blank face expresses nothing as he looks into
his father’s eyes. No anger, no love, no sadness. Nothing but emptiness.
    He  grabs my hand and pulls  me away. With  no need to look  over my
shoulder, I turn my back on lies and Noah’s past. I glance up at Noah, and
for the first time in hours, I smile.





Despite wanting to spend time with Noah after his crash, I need to speak to
my brother without  an audience. My  lies hurt  Santi more than he lets  on
because he has the softest heart.
    I  order us carry-out  dinner because the way to his heart is through  his
stomach. When I  arrive  at  our  suite, he  grabs the  bag from  my  hands
without giving  me a backward glance. He sits at the large dining table and
pops open my  takeout box  instead of  his.  His  eyes assess the contents
before sliding it to the empty seat across from him.
    His  eyes remain glued to his food as he shovels fried rice into his mouth.
I sit and toy with the plastic-wrapped utensils.
    “Santi,  I’m  truly  so sorry for  hiding the truth  from you. I  was going to
tell you after  the Abu Dhabi Prix  because I didn’t want  to upset you. You
and Noah have a rough history. But I hated lying to you, and I never want to
do it again.”
    He  blinks at me. More shoveling of food  and scraping of plastic cutlery
against Styrofoam. I deserve his silence and anger.
    “I  went to Rio early because Noah planned a trip, not because I was with
Sophie. I used her as an alibi multiple  times and I’m  sorry.” I  don’t know
what else to say.
    He takes a few deep breaths. “We always tell everything to each other. I
hate how you lied to me…but I get it. I only  want you to be happy, and I’m
willing  to put it  past us.” He takes a big gulp of water. “I  can accept Noah
as your boyfriend under one condition.”
    I  hold my breath, waiting to hear what he says. In usual Santi fashion, he
makes me sit with  my  discomfort, taking  a few  more bites of  his  dinner
before putting his fork down.

280
    “If   you two  break up, you  still  have to come to  my races. No bullshit
about it being awkward or how Noah broke your heart. You want to act like
a big girl, then you need to deal with the consequences if you have a falling
out.” He rubs his stubbled chin while he assesses me.
    I  can agree to those terms. Noah acts confident enough for the two of us
about how this relationship will work out.
    “Deal.”

281
38

282
                                                    Noah






The Abu Dhabi gala reeks of extravagance and wealth; crystal chandeliers
shine around me as I mingle with  sponsors. Everyone wants to talk about
the final Grand Prix. About who will  come out on top. Whether I will choke
or  dominate behind  the  wheel.  My   head pounds  from  the  barrage of
questions, wishing I could escape with Maya because takeout and a movie
sound great right now.
    Maya  busies herself with  Sophie, getting drunk on champagne while I
schmooze with minimal booze.
    I  wrap up chatting with a sponsor, eager to spend time with Maya, when
Sophie’s dad pulls me aside. He wears a suit with his graying  hair slicked
back, a grimace marring his face. Not exactly the best hello.
    “Noah,  follow  me. I  need to show you something.” His eyes tell  me to
not argue.
    My   brows  furrow  at  his  request. I  follow   him  out of   the ballroom,
curiosity piquing my  interest as we walk into another empty room. My lips
lift  at the memory of  Maya and me in  this position. Except once my  eyes
land on the other Alatorre sibling, my smirk turns into  a frown. Santi made
sure to avoid me at all costs this past week. Nerves make my hands clench
as I tamp down the tendency to run a hand through my thick hair.
    “All   right,  you  two. I  don’t  like  how  tense you both have been. Fans
notice, the crew comments on it, and I sure as hell don’t want to deal with
it. Get  everything out  now. I  won’t  allow  any  more drama on my  team,
especially with  the final  Prix coming  up. If  I  wanted to  be waist-deep in
shit, I  would  have worked  for  McCoy.  Santi, I’ll   allow  you  one punch.
Make it count because everyone knows Noah can be a smug fucker.”
    My  eyes bulge. James is giving Santi an all-access pass to take a shot at
me? What the fuck.
    Santi  shares my same surprise, his  eyebrows drawn together, making
him look like  he’s thinking  too hard. I’d  laugh if  I didn’t  want to piss him
off more.
    “I  don’t know  what to say.” His Spanish accent draws out his words.

283
    A   tick  in  his jaw  says differently.  I  should pass Santi  my  therapist’s
number, give him some help in the emotional expression department.
    “Oh,  cut the crap. He  slept with  your sister behind your back. Now  he
dates her, even loves her—all while competing against you. Of course, you
have shit to say. Get it out or hit him. But fix this crap.” James taps his shoe
against the floor.
    Sophie’s   dad  stands tall,   not   backing  down   from   this   challenge,
commanding respect from us as our team principal. Cue the feels.
    “Okay,  fine. Noah, it  pisses me off how  you disrespected me and went
behind my back. You have a terrible track record with women, and I  don’t
want my  sister to become another number in  your  long list.  Someone to
pass the time with until you get bored. Not to mention the fact that she’s my
sister.” Santi crosses his arms, his fears and distaste for my  past hanging
around us like a third teammate.
    “I’m   sorry for  hiding it,  but I’m  not sorry for  doing it in  the first place.
Don’t expect Maya to be either. I want to put it  past us, because I love her,
and I  want  to  be  with  her.  Forever.  I  can’t  help  my  crappy  past and
decisions, but I can control my future. And she’s it.”
    My  confession hangs in the air, willing to admit everything if it stops his
moping.
    He  walks up to me, his clenched fists a warning. Shit. His eyes glare at
me. I stand there, ready to take a punch, anything for this to be done with.
    “I  don’t  need to hit you to feel better. I love my sister too much to mess
up your pretty face.” He  shoves his hand out in front of him,  and I take it.
His fingers grip  mine tightly.  I let him  pull  his man card, not interested in
another pissing contest with him. I’ll save that for the track.
    “I’m   proud of  you both, settling this  like real men. Now  get out of  my
sight. I don’t want to hear about any more drama from either of you, so help
me God,  because I  didn’t   ask for  two   sons. I  deal  with  my   daughter
enough.” James’s voice has a  hint  of  pride  in  it.  We look  over  at him,
catching his grin.
    Santi  and I walk  out together, the tension following  us from  Brazil  no
longer a problem.
    Santi claps me on the shoulder. “Let’s grab a shot? Cheers to the end of
the season and to new beginnings?”
    “Best  idea you’ve had all year.”

284
39

285
                                                    Maya






“Just so you know,  I think  I  threw up  twice in  my  mouth looking  at you
two.” My  brother barrels over after his practice round. The pit crew went on
their lunch  break, meaning we  have a silent  garage to ourselves, perfect
timing for my filming.
    I  smile. “Aw, feel free to use the nearest trash can when you need it.”
    “Quit    harassing   my   girlfriend,    Santiago.”   Noah   trails   into    our
conversation. He makes his smug presence known, his palm tapping my ass
before sliding into the back pocket of my jeans. Can’t say I hate it, now that
I reap the benefits of his wicked smiles and dirty words.
    My  brother  groans. “You’re the one who  just smacked her ass right in
front of me. Do you have a death wish?”
    Noah  grins while  my  cheeks heat. He lives to  get under my  brother’s
skin, despite the number of times I tell him to stop teasing Santi. But at least
they both laugh.
    “I   can’t  help  our  burning  love for   one another,”  Noah purrs  with  a
dramatic clutching of his heart. Beautiful asshole.
    Santiago  gags. “Did   you  lose  your  balls  between  Brazil  and  here?
Because if so, my chances of winning  the Championship just got a whole
lot better.”
    Noah drops his head back and laughs. “I think Maya found my—”
    I  rush to cover his mouth, standing on the tips of my  toes to reach him.
“Nope. Absolutely not. Dirty jokes are off the table forever and ever.”
    Noah  licks my  hand and winks at me. I  pull  away, not trusting myself
around him because he has a way with words and his tongue.
    “Seriously,  can’t you  both make out  somewhere in private? Preferably
far away from  the  pit garage where I  don’t  have to see you  pushing my
sister up against stacks of tires.”
    Santi  scared the shit  out  of  us yesterday. The  piles of  tires  fell  like
dominos, drawing everyone’s attention toward the three of  us. My  cheeks
remained red the whole day after that display.
    “We  learned our lesson with that one.” Noah shakes his head, fighting a
grin.

286
    Unlike  him, I  let out a laugh, unable to rid the mental image of a fuming
Santi pummeled by massive tires.
    “I’m   sorry. We’ll  be better. That means no more funny business.” I give
Noah a pointed look.
    “Things  we do are anything but funny.” Noah waggles his brows.
    My  brother runs an agitated palm down his face. “I  hate to say it, but I
may prefer  broody   Noah versus  lovey-dovey  Noah.  That  guy  kept  to
himself during  race  weekends rather than shoving  his  tongue down  my
sister’s throat at every possible opportunity.”
    We all  know he likes Noah. These two have never been friendlier, with
us all eating dinner together each night this week. They even hung out  on
their own when I  went to interview  Liam. I  came back to the suite to find
the two of them playing video games, duking it out with an F1 simulation. I
sat between them and spent the night watching TV with  the biggest smile
on my face.
    I  situate the two men of my life in chairs facing back to back.
    “Okay.  Moving  along.”  I  click  the  record button on  my  camera. “Hi,
everyone. Welcome to my last vlog of this F1 season. We’re in Abu Dhabi
where Santi and Noah just completed their practice round. With  only  two
days left   before the  final   Grand  Prix,  I   wanted to  take  advantage of
Bandini’s off-time. Today we are playing the Newlywed Game with our two
favorite Bandini boys. The game goes as follows: Noah and Santiago each
have two cards. A blue card means Noah, and red means Santi. Every time
they both  agree on an  answer, the team  gets a point.  After  ten  months
together, let’s see how well these two know each other. The goal is to win as
a team, so think of  your  answers carefully. Three strikes and you’re  both
done, proving to the  world Jax and Liam  are the best teammates.” Those
two scored thirty points together, surpassing my expectations. I doubt Santi
and Noah will make it past ten.
    I  take up a seat next to the camera, choosing to stay out of the frame.
    “Okay,  first one. Who has had the least amount of speeding tickets?”
    Two  red  cards go  up.  Noah and  Santiago turn  around  and smile  at
getting the answer right.
    “American  cops pull you over for everything.” Noah rolls his eyes.
    My  brother faces the camera. “Because only an amateur gets caught.”
    I  continue because we will never finish at this rate. “Who has the bigger
butt?”

287
    My  brother holds up a red card while Noah lifts up a blue card.
    “Oh,  you both disagreed. One X.” I cross out the question.
    Noah  sighs.  “Come  on, Santiago.  Your  ass could  never fill   out  my
jeans.”
    My  brother  stands up and shows his butt off  to the camera. I laugh  to
myself while  Noah gets up to  compare, the two of  them not coming  to a
conclusion. Clearly their bonding has reached new levels because they ask
my opinion, but I shrug my head. Not touching that debate.
    “Who  holds their liquor better?”
    Two red cards wave in the air.
    “Stick  to beer. No one wants to see you taking up shop at the nearest pit
trash can again.”
    The three of  us laugh. Noah’s poor decisions don’t hang around us, not
after he admitted the truth about his dad to  my brother two  days ago. My
boyfriend, the  same man who acted like  the  whole world  could  go fuck
itself, gave my brother a hug and told him thank you for  punching his dad.
A freaking thank you. If I  didn’t already love him, I  would have offered my
heart at that moment.
    “Who  is the biggest baby when sick?”
    Two  red cards go up. Glad my brother sees his man-child ways because
the stomach flu I got the last time  taking care of him was nothing  short of
terrible.
    “Who  is more stubborn?”
    Two opposite colored cards hang in the air.
    “Another  strike and a prime example of how stubborn you both are.”
    “You  do know it  took you  like eight months to figure  out you liked  my
sister, right?” My brother flicks his blue card for emphasis.
    Noah  smirks at  the camera. “Not  as bad as you taking  ten months to
realize you wanted me as a friend rather than an enemy.”
    Oh, shit.
    “I  didn’t  need a referee for Liam and Jax’s game. Which by the way, you
both are going to lose because you can’t agree on anything.”
    “Well,  at least we can agree on how we both love you,” my brother says
with a telling smile.
    My  chest tightens at the two of them looking at me. I never in a million
years would have imagined them getting along like this, willing to put aside
their differences to make me happy.

288
    The two of  them lose the game after a total of nine points.
    Unfortunately,  they couldn’t  decide who cares more about me. No, I’m
just joking.  They couldn’t  agree on who deserves a World Championship
more, with Noah raising a red card while my brother raised a blue one.
    Yup,  that happened. Jax and Liam may have won  the game, but these
two won each other over, a seemingly impossible task. And if  that doesn’t
deserve a trophy for  the Constructors’ Championship, I  don’t  know what
does.

289
40

290
                                                    Noah






My phone rings on  the nightstand. And thank God Maya left  the suite ten
minutes ago because the curse words flying out of  my mouth are nothing
short of abhorrent.
    I  don’t know  what pushes me to answer the phone. Whether because of
brewing emotions inside  of me  or because I have a kink  for  masochistic
tendencies. My finger slides across the glass, my head pounding to the beat
of my heart.
    “Mother.  What can I do for you?”
    Why  hit her with pleasantries when she has the emotional intelligence of
floral wallpaper. If you’re trying  to make the connection, don’t.
    “My  son.”
    A  classic. Nothing like reminding me of  who signed my birth certificate
to manipulate me.
    “I’m   busy and about to leave for my qualifier. What do you need?”
    “You  can work  on your  delivery a bit,  Noah.”  Her voice carries like  a
melody through the phone. A siren who calls to men with wallets and trust
funds, luring them in before ripping their hearts out.
    I  grunt, unable to produce words.
    “Well,   I’m  spending time with  Clarissa and Jennifer in Dubai,  and we
thought about visiting   for  the Prix.  What do  you  think  about getting  us
some tickets? Preferably in the VIP section with a better view, not that one
near the stands.”
    Because  God  forbid,   she  actually  has  a   view  of   the  finish   line.
Grandstand VIP sections don’t come with  complimentary champagne and
Instagram street credit.
    Every  time my mom asks for tickets, I get them. In the whole scheme of
things, I never thought to say no because it was easy to do. Easy to give in
to my  toxic  parents. Simple to  not  put up  a fight,  not  wanting  to make
waves like my  dad despite how sick it  made me feel to be used over and
over again.
    But  like  I  did with  my  dad, I want  to give  her one last chance. Being
around Maya has made me a forgiving person.

291
    “I   can message my assistant. How are you doing?” I hold the phone to
my ear, having no interest in asking about any tickets.
    She scoffs. “Is it that man who prattles on the phone forever?”
    If  she means Steven, who likes to ask her about her day, then yes.
    “Yup,   the same one  I’ve  had since  I  started with  Bandini.  Can  you
believe it’s been seven years since I began racing with the team?” Bet you a
weekend on my yacht she doesn’t catch my mistake.
    “Nope.  But  with the  end of the season means your birthday is coming
up. How are you celebrating your twenty-ninth this year?”
    I’d   say she blacked out  for  her entire  pregnancy except she couldn’t
drink.  Surprisingly  she  remembers the  month  I  was  born,  most likely
because my father drops a large sum of  money in  her bank account as a
“thank you for birthing my spawn” gift.
    “Actually,    I’m   turning  thirty-one.  But   numbers blur   after  so  many
years.” Insert obligatory eye roll here.
    “Exactly.  My  mistake.”  Her laugh  sounds similar to  nails scratching a
chalkboard.
    I  hate every second of this call, of the battle waging inside of me to not
hang up the phone. But I want to show myself why I need to let go. Why  I
can’t fall  back into a damaging relationship with  my parents because their
love is conditional.  And if  I  learned one thing in  therapy, besides the fact
that crying makes my  face puffy  as fuck, is  how love  doesn’t come with
conditions. No ifs,  ands, or buts. It should make you  a better person—not
because you have to  be, but  because you want  to be.  I  want to  be  the
fucking best for Maya and myself. Need to love myself and all that jazz.
    “Yeah, your mistake. Did you know I  met someone while competing this
year?”
    “That’s  sweet.” She distracts herself with talking to someone else in the
background.
    That’s  sweet. Although an  upgrade from my  father’s  comments about
Maya, she can’t say much more than that?
    “Clarissa  is  asking if  you  could also  access some VIP passes for the
after-party? We personally like the one with  the champagne company, but
we aren’t against others.”
    Looks  like she can procure more than three words at a time. But like  a
gumball machine, she only works when you put money in her.
    “You  know, I don’t think this is going to work.”

292
    Time to rip  off the Band-Aid. Because why the fuck not, with everything
else in the Slade family going to shit.
    She sighs. “What do you mean?”
    “You,  me, your  ex-lover  Nicholas. The whole  thing. I  can’t  do this to
myself anymore, trying to  be a son I thought both of  you wanted. Instead,
you only contact me when convenient. And  shockingly you withheld  your
one-stop user card for  the whole  year until  now.  But in  case you didn’t
know, I  got into  the worst  crash of  my career two  weeks ago. And  how
many times did you call on me to check? None. Hell, how many times have
you called me this whole season? Besides the one misdial?”
    Her silence does nothing but encourage me.
    “I  appreciate you for giving  birth to me, for being whatever you tried to
be. But it’s over. You should have protected me from him. The first time he
hit  me,  you  walked   away  because you  didn’t   want  to   threaten your
allowance. Time and time again, you let me down. So, by  all means, let it
be my turn. I can’t get you tickets. Not now. Not next year. Not ever again.
If you have an interest in calling me to  get to know me as a person, let me
know. If not, have a good life.”
    I  wait, holding the phone to my ear, willing  her to say anything. Closure
is a funny concept. Everyone talks about how cathartic it feels, but no one
describes the pain  you  experience before. The  courage needed to  push
through tough situations. How much it rips  a person up to know they need
to let go, not because they want to, but because they have to.
    My  whole life,  I lived chasing an unattainable prize of my parents’ love.
I sped down racetracks and life, willing   it  to go faster, but now  I want  to
slow  down. Enjoy   the moments with   people who  matter,  who  want to
remember my birthday,  or  who  know  five  facts about  me that  can’t be
googled.
    The dial tone greets me.
    I  clutch my phone, my lungs taking in  the fresh air. For once, I have no
ill  will  toward  her, only wishing  her the best. Everything falls  into  place.
My therapist said I needed to face my past to embrace my future. Looks like
I went to hell and back, scoring an angel along the way.

293
41

294
                                                    Maya






“Let me get this straight. You invited my parents to the final Grand Prix two
days ago? And they said yes?” I struggle to get the words out.
    Noah dropped this bomb on me while we watched a movie on our hotel
couch. He casually mentioned how my parents boarded a flight last night to
come visit us, like we all planned it.
    “Yes.  Can you believe it? They want to  see their two kids after months
of being away.” His eyes sparkle.
    “But  why would you do that?”
    “Why  not?” His lips  tip at the corners.
    I  tilt my head at him. “Don’t  answer a question with a question.”
    “Can  I answer with a kiss instead?”
    Noah  pulls  me  onto his  lap,  the couch  dipping  under our  combined
weight. His lips  press against mine, a tingle spreading to my  spine as our
tongues caress, teasing each other. The charged energy between us never
wavers. A constant current, all at the touch of our hands or the press of his
lips.
    I   break the  kiss. “Under  all   that attitude,  you  sure have the  biggest
heart.”
    “Sh. Don’t  let anyone in on our secret.”
    Noah kisses me stupid, my mind blanking as he shows me how he feels.
I love everything about this man. He continues to throw me for  a loop and
surprises me whenever he can.
    His  lips move from my lips to my neck before trailing down the V of my
polo.
    “As  much as I want to  continue, we have dinner plans with your whole
family tonight.”
    “They  are here?” I rush to stand, leaving a lusty Noah behind.
    “Better  get a move on, dinner’s at seven.” His dazzling smile reaches his
eyes, lines showing at the corners.
    I  squeal and hug him  before hurrying  to get  ready. Noah keeps to his
side of the bathroom, thankfully, because he tends to distract me.

295
    “I  still  can’t  believe you flew them out here. Santi thought about it, but
my parents said no when he asked. How did you convince them?”
    “Are  you  keen on learning my tactics?” His eyes dance from the bright
lights.
    I  wave a hand in  the air. “I  became a victim of  your skills  a long time
ago. Why hold back on me now?”
    He  crosses his arms and leans against the vanity. “I asked them to do it
for me.”
    My  face must show the confusion that runs through me.
    Noah sighs. “I  told them my parents aren’t coming, and it would mean a
lot to me to have my girlfriend’s  family here, no matter who wins. Because
I would  like  to get  to know  them before I  whisk  you off  on a  two-week
vacation. But most of all, it  will  make you happy, which in  turn makes me
happy.”
    Oh, wow. Okay, I didn’t expect that.
    I  stride toward him and wrap my arms around his neck. Looks like I get
to be the distractor today because Noah’s sincerity and kindness deserve all
the rewards.





We made it to dinner only  ten minutes late. I count our delay as a success
because if someone had seen my hair after our bathroom romp, they would
have called me a lost cause.
    Santi scoffs  at the role of  a fifth  wheel, choosing to become the life of
the conversation instead of sitting back.
    “You   know  when  I  gave  Maya  some rules  about our  trip,   I  didn’t
anticipate Noah being an issue.” My brother flips through his menu.
    “Isn’t   the first  rule  to  never underestimate your enemy?” Noah  holds
back a smile.
    “You  got me there. I thought you were too much of a jackass for Maya.
She tends to go for the nerdier guys.”
    “That’s  so not true. Name a nerd I’ve dated.” I cross my arms. Seeing as
Noah has slept with enough women to  populate a small island, he can sit
and handle this conversation. Mainly because I don’t believe my brother’s
words.

296
    “Xavier,  for one.”
    “How  was he a nerd?”
    “Well,   he did  like   to  remodel those computers,”  my  dad chimes  in.
Great, did everyone think Xavier was geeky?
    “He  also  loved watching  The Twilight  Zone with  Mami. Talked  about
how he posted on Reddit boards about it and stuff.” Santi hits Noah with a
smirk.
    I  see what he does here.
    My  mom smiles at the memory. “Such a sweet boy, offering to read the
Bible with me.”
    My  brother shoots me a look. All  right, the Bible  study group was a bit
weird.
    My  dad joins in on the fun because why the hell not. “Don’t forget about
Felipe.”
    “What  was wrong  with  him? Do  you all  have chisme sessions without
me?”
    “To  be fair, he was gay.” My  brother hits me with  a family secret I had
no clue of.
    Noah  chokes on his wine.  “You  dated someone without knowing they
were gay?”
    My  eyes narrow at him. “Seeing as this is all news to me, clearly not.”
    “Sorry.  We have to  air all  two  pieces of Maya’s  dirty  laundry in  case
Noah wants to  run in  the  other direction,”  Santi  says before sipping his
wine.
    My  mom butts in, ending Santi’s game. “Noah won’t run. He’s liked her
since Barcelona.”
    Noah and I look at my mom with wide eyes.
    “Oh,  don’t  look at me like  that. The way you  looked at my daughter is
one I  recognize in my  own  husband. You two  were just too  stubborn to
admit it.”
    My  dad grumbles under his breath.
    “What’s  that, mi amor?” She smiles at him.
    He looks Noah in the eyes. “If he breaks her heart, I’ll run him over with
the car he loves more than anything.”
    “Loved  more than anything.” Noah sends me a wide smile that I save for
my memories.

297
42

298
                                                    Maya






Noah preps for the final Prix race despite the crash last week, all smiles and
jokes as the crew works in the garage. Such a badass. He landed the third
position on the grid after a decent qualifying round.
    Pit  mechanics and engineers act as the backbone of a team, fixing any
damage from Noah’s previous crash; the car  looks brand new  with  not a
dent in sight. Noah thanks the crew as his fingers graze the red hood.
    Worst-case scenarios flash through my mind as I hang out with Santi for
his last race. I clasp my  fingers in front  of  me, my sneakers rocking back
and forth against the concrete floor. Abu Dhabi.  The final  Grand Prix and
home of the infamous  crash between Noah and my brother. With  a close
Championship standing between Bandini and McCoy, it all comes down to
this race.
    Noah  runs  an unsteady hand  through his  hair  while  he  talks  to  the
engineers. Despite  me  asking   him   about  his  nervousness, he  feigns
indifference. He gives me a quick peck on the lips before he takes off with
crew members toward the track.
    My  brother tugs me in for a good luck hug.
    “Try  not to crash into my boyfriend this time,” I mumble into his chest.
    “I  was planning on knocking Liam  out. Seemed like a safer bet because
that guy can’t hold a grudge to save his life.”
    Our bodies shake from laughing. We break apart, and Santi hops into his
car, waving at me as the crew pulls him away.
    I  hang out in pit row, preferring to be close instead of lost somewhere in
the crowd. Earlier, Noah reserved Grandstand VIP tickets for my parents so
they could experience a Prix like real fans. My heart swelled at the look of
appreciation my parents offered him, both of them unaware of how much it
means to Noah to have someone rooting for his team. Noah, a man denied
of love and affection, craves my family’s acceptance more than anything.
    Race cars zipping down the track do little to calm me. Noah’s car speeds
by, a red blur with an engine reverberating off the walls. McCoy cars follow
behind, creating a vortex of sound and dirty air.

299
    Noah  deserves the World Championship, and honestly, I  want  him  to
win, hoping it can help us overcome these worries.
    Sorry, Santi. I’m loyal  to my boyfriend, too.
    A  few  cars crash throughout the laps. One of the drivers from Albrecht
can’t catch a break this  season, leaving behind a crumpled mess of a car
after turn three.
    Cars  lap around the  track. Sports announcers talk about  Noah’s swift
recovery after his tragic loss in Brazil,  his racing a testament to his will  to
win. My  heart taps against my chest, unrelenting during the first few  laps.
No hiccups yet. I take my first  steady breaths once Noah makes it through
his first ten laps with no issues.
    Round and round cars go, careening through the track. Racers complete
laps in less than  two minutes. The  Prix  rankings are close, with  Bandini
seconds away from McCoy,  Santi trailing  behind Noah with  Liam  in  the
lead. Noah’s engine roars as he pulls in for a pit stop to get new  tires. His
last one for this season. He takes off again, spitting himself  back out onto
the track, eating up any time lost.
    Noah  completes his forty-fourth  lap,  only  eleven circuits left  between
him and the winter break. His car hangs behind Liam, putting him in second
place. He can’t  win  the  World  Championship if  he  keeps the runner-up
position.
    His   car  jerks,  the  movement  unfamiliar.  Like   he  hesitates. Noah’s
reputation for overtaking cars is missing, his usual swagger on the racetrack
not coming out.
    “Maya,  I need you to get over here.” Sophie’s dad waves me over.
    I    don’t   hide  my    surprise  when  he   hands  me   the  headset  that
communicates with Noah. He presses the mute button, taking a deep inhale
while rubbing his temple. His intense green eyes bore into mine.
    “Noah  wants to talk to you. The nerves got to him, and he thinks you can
calm him down. Help him  out. His place in the Championship rests on you
working with  him. If  he doesn’t get over this, he may  never come back to
race because fears like this can ruin a career.”
    Okay, no pressure. Understatement of the year. But I don’t have a second
to linger on it.  I  grab the headphones, situate the microphone, and unmute
myself.
    “Hi,   this is Maya. Do you copy?”  I try  to imitate team radio videos that
Noah and I have watched online.

300
    Noah’s  chuckle  sounds through the  headphones. “Hi, this  is  Noah. I
copy.”
    “Well,   I’m  going to  be shit at this  job. But  hold  on. There’s a red car
behind you moving pretty  fast. There’s one car in front  of  you also going
exceptionally fast. About three clicks away.”
    “You’re  nailing it.  Keep it up. Not sure what three clicks means but…”
    I  laugh into  the mic.  Can’t wait  for  sports announcers to listen in  and
comment on our conversation.
    Wanting  privacy from  the crew, I walk  up to  the railing  that overlooks
pit row. A  television  hanging above offers an overhead view of  the track.
Cars squeal in  the  distance. Useless lights  blink  all   over the  computer
screen, offering me nothing but confusion.
    “Hmm,  there’s an amazing driver  with  the number twenty-eight on his
car. But he won’t overtake the driver in front of him. What’s going on?”
    Noah  makes it past another lap.  He holds  back, not acting  aggressive
enough to win the whole thing.
    “Tell   me more about  this great driver.  I  don’t  know  if  I  see him  out
here.” His voice strains.
    My  heart dips at  the thought of him  panicking in  the middle of  a race.
“They say Noah Slade’s basically the  best. Likes to break records, on the
racetrack and in the bedroom. You gotta be careful with him.”
    He lets out a hoarse laugh.
    “This  is going to be a terrible team radio video. I’ll  end up on YouTube,
perdóname Mami y Papi. Ignore this.”
    Noah speeds up after turning. Good.
    “So  anyway, please stop distracting me. And  quit the seductive laughs
too. Did you know  this guy agreed to help the girl grow her vlog? He may
be part of  the reason she has over a million  subscribers now. But I  don’t
think the guy  knows he’s stuck with  her. Stage-five clinger. She’s already
signed a contract with the team to  come to the races next year since they
want her to  film  more behind  the scenes action to promote the brand. A
whole ordeal.”
    His  voice expresses his surprise. “You didn’t  tell  me. Congrats, Maya.
I’m so proud of  you; I knew  you could do it.  Bandini is lucky  to have you
working on social media.”
    “Sh.  This story isn’t about me.” I  laugh at his slip up before continuing.
“Pretty crazy. Imagine the girl’s  surprise that number twenty-eight doesn’t

301
want to drive faster. Take more risks. He took a chance on their relationship,
and it  all panned out.  I  wonder if  he could  do the  same thing today?”  I
imagine fans commenting about how cliché I  am on our video. Oh  well, I
won’t be crying myself to sleep. At least not in that way.
    Noah’s deep breathing and gear changes ring through the radio. The roar
of the  engine excites me.  His  car accelerates, pushing closer to  Liam’s,
closing the gap between McCoy and Bandini.
    “Pretty  sure the girl told the guy that she doesn’t date losers. But I can’t
be too sure about that one because I haven’t asked her. But you can never
put it past these racing fans, all fun and games until the guy doesn’t end up
on the podium.  I  think  girls  have a thing  for  trophies  and race suits—a
combo deal.”
    Noah chuckles into the mic. With  only a few  laps left to overtake Liam,
the Championship is starting to slip from Noah’s fingers.
    “But  that’s  a lie. Because this girl  loves the guy. Like  the ‘forever  and
always’ type  of love.  The ‘kids  playing  around outside while  the parents
have a quickie upstairs’ kind of love. Have you heard of that type?”
    He  stays  silent.  His  rhythmic  breathing  and the  hum  of  the  engine
encourage me to continue.
    “It’s   pretty insane. Can you imagine that kind  of love? I  can because I
experience it. The  story doesn’t  end with  a happily-ever-after  because it
starts with it. Because they have the rest of their lives to  finish their  story.
Crazy, huh?”
    Noah speeds up at a turn, pushing his car to the limit, sparks flying from
his rear wing. He overtakes Liam in one of the last corners.
    “Great job,  babe! That was an amazing one. I knew you could do it.”
    “Maya?”  his voice rasps.
    “Yup?”
    “Keep  talking. I love hearing your voice.”
    Happy to oblige.

302
43

303
                                                    Noah






I lift  the American flag in the air. World. Fucking. Champion.
    I  can’t thank Maya enough for helping  me at the end there. Almost lost
my shit  behind the wheel, poorly  controlled  tremors running  through my
body until she came on the radio. But her voice and words pushed me to the
limit and gave me courage.
    The crowd wildly  jumps around with energy and excitement. I call Maya
over from   the  roped-off  VIP  section.  Security  guards let   her through,
grinning and shaking their heads as she runs up the steps of the stage and
launches herself into my arms. The best hello sealed with a kiss. I twirl her
around as  she giggles,  her  arms wrapping  around  my  neck  while  her
addicting floral scent invades my nose. Someone passes me the trophy, and
I hold it and her in my arms. One of the happiest days of my life.
    Our friends shower us with champagne. Maya screams as the cold liquid
splashes against us and runs down  our bodies.  I  drop my  head back  in
laughter, guzzling champagne that miraculously makes it  into  my mouth.
Fans scream  as  I   give   Maya  a   mind-numbing  kiss   that  tastes  like
champagne and happiness.
    Amazing  how quickly life  changes.
    I  thought winning the World  Championship was the best thing, the only
goal I had for  a long time.  Shit, was I wrong.  I realize today that  the best
thing includes winning with your loved ones.
    Not  my shitty  father. But with  Maya, my team, and my friends. This  is
the best feeling ever.
    Well,  the best for now.

304
44

305
                                                    Maya






If someone had told me a year ago I’d be standing on the F1 stage, hugging
Noah Slade and my brother  with each arm, I  would  have laughed until  I
cried. My brother stands next to me with  the biggest grin on his face after
placing third in the entire World  Championship. He and Noah shower each
other  with   champagne after  winning   the  Constructors’   Championship
together. Old rivals hugging like friends.
    Funny how life  has a way of working itself out. I  joined the F1 schedule
because I had nothing going for  me, a post-graduate with a trail  of failed
attempts at jobs, stuck living in  my brother’s  shadow whether I wanted to
be or not.
    I  can’t help looking over at the man who called dibs on me, the one with
wavy dark hair and blue eyes that hypnotize me. A World Champion with a
heart of platinum to match the trophy he carries above his head. The same
man who says “I  love you”  instead of “good  morning”  every day. A self-
proclaimed “sappy  motherfucker”  who  begged me to  wear  his  race car
number today because he needs to mark me in every single way. A human
wrecking ball who came into my life unannounced and smashed through all
my expectations, leaving behind rubble, dust, and a fresh start.
    But  most importantly, Noah Slade, the love of my life.

306
Epilogue

307
                                                    Maya







One  Year    Later





Noah and I relax on his balcony, staring out at the Amalfi coast, blue waters
glistening under the morning sun. He messes around on his computer while
I  appreciate the view.  I  welcome the  melodic  sound of  water splashing
against the rugged coast. We hang out in our pajamas, enjoying our coffee
—our morning ritual while on break.
    A  year has passed since Noah won his fourth World Championship. Our
team radio  from  the  Abu   Dhabi  Grand Prix   became a viral   video  on
YouTube,  fans  supporting   our  relationship   immediately.   My   parents
welcomed Noah into our family,  taking him  in, no  longer allowing him  to
spend time meant for families alone—holidays, birthdays, the works.
    F1  still  plays a  huge part in  our lives.  I  travel around the  world with
Noah, joining  him at  every race. My  vlog remains popular amongst fans.
The Formula Corporation asked me to work  with the other phases like F2
and F3,  but  Noah  claims  he  can’t  win   without   his  good-luck  charm,
threatening to hold me hostage if I skip out on his races.
    Salty air hits me in the face, rustling my dark waves.
    Did  I say how much I love Noah’s house in Italy? Something straight out
of a movie.
    I  scroll through my phone to check morning updates when I get a strange
notification. Weird.
    I  look up into Noah’s blue eyes. “Did you click the wrong date for me to
upload my next video? I got a notification that it just went live.”
    “I  don’t think  so. That’s strange.” He shrugs.
    My  point exactly. He grabs his laptop and places it on the table. A black
screen with an odd title plays in front of us, nothing like the uploaded video
I had scheduled.
    “That’s   not it   because I picked  a  different  thumbnail.  Do  you think
someone hacked into my  account? And  what  does More  to Come  even

308
mean? I like to be punny. I’d never come up with something like that.”
    He chuckles. “I’m  well aware. Before we report it, let’s watch it.”
    Noah, always a thinker. Exactly why Bandini pays him the big bucks.
    The video starts up with a short clip of me at Santi’s first Bandini race in
Australia. Someone took a  video of  me giving  Noah  a death stare. How
embarrassing, but appropriate for how I felt about him at the time.
    “Oh  my God. Who  would even upload this? Look at how I’m  staring at
you. And why were you laughing behind my back?” How interesting, Noah
checking me out on day one. What a player.
    The scene changes before Noah gives me an answer. This time a shot of
us at a  press conference plays. Noah grins  at me while  I  bob  my  head,
making fun of  one of  the reporters. He barks out a laugh  when I  roll  my
eyes. Liam   and Santiago  glance  at  him  while   reporters  look  around,
wondering what made Noah react the way he did.
    How  cute of him to look at me like that. I had no idea he checked me out
that much, hanging onto whatever dumb thing I’d do next. It makes me feel
all warm and fuzzy.
    Next  scene plays, a clip from the vlog  I  did with  Noah and his car. He
sits near the cockpit while I ask him a bunch of questions. My heart warms
at the clip,  enjoying how he  glances at me with an enamored look on  his
face. Either that or he looks like he wants to take my clothes off. A true toss-
up. I never looked at the video this closely, not checking for signs of Noah
liking  me. Noah gives me a beaming smile when I laugh and talk  into the
camera. He barely pays attention, his eyes remaining on me.
    My  stomach flutters at the clip.  I  feel off-balance, being hit  with many
emotions at once—happiness and nostalgia mixed together.
    I  have an idea of who created this More to Come video. The big guy next
to me remains suspiciously quiet, not one peep coming from his seductive
lips. But I don’t pause the video because questions would ruin the moment.
    Another  video  starts, this time  of the  podium when Santiago won  the
Grand Prix in  Spain. Noah ignores everything happening on the stage. He
gazes off to  the side, the  camera panning off  to  find  what he smiles  at,
catching me with my back turned, hugging my parents. The Spanish flag is
draped over me as I jump up and down.
    My  heart beats rapidly, my  throat closing  up, unable to get any words
out. Suppressed happy tears cloud my vision.  Noah was always into  me,

309
even when I  thought he was  only interested in  hooking  up, but  his eyes
betray the way he feels. It’s a sucker punch right in the feels.
    Various video  clips play,  including one of  me whistling  at Noah  as he
walks down the runway  in Monaco. I  embarrassingly yell how  I’d  like  to
take his tux off. He  winks at me, but I  miss it because Sophie distracts me
by covering my  mouth with  her hands. I’d  die of  embarrassment if Noah
didn’t squeeze my hand in a silent way of telling me he still  finds me cute.
Not sure how this video saw the light of day or how Noah got it  in the first
place. Sneaky man.
    Another  plays of me dancing up on the podium after the kart race Noah
planned. My  scream shakes the computer’s speakers as Noah sprays me
with champagne like a real F1 racer, even making me chug straight from the
bottle. Peer pressure is a thing. I dance around on the small step, my arms
thrown up  in the air.  Noah laughs along with  me  before he winks  to the
camera. Ovaries, meet your master.
    His  thoughtfulness makes me want to cuddle up to him and never let go.
Put a “do not disturb” sign on our front door, sealing us off from the public
for an unforeseeable lifetime.
    The camera catches him smiling wide as he carries me over his shoulder
to  the  car. Claps  for  the  cameraman because he  conducts a  perfectly
executed zoom of Noah smacking my ass. A+ filmography.
    Damn  Noah and  all  his cuteness. My  throat feels like  I  swallowed  a
rock, unable to say much as I watch all of our memories. Why does he have
to be such a sappy yet seductive man?
    Tears  escape my eyes. Noah  occasionally  rubs  them away  with  his
thumb, my skin heating up at his touch.
    He  stays silent.  The whole  thing  almost feels  like  too  much. Almost
being the keyword since I  need to lap up  this romantic display  and enjoy
every second. Duh. I’ll replay this  video a hundred times—to my children,
my grandchildren, my next-door neighbor. Everyone in walking distance.
    A  clip  plays of me screaming for dear life while  he drives the atrocious
green Bandini car. He  stares at me and laughs while  one  hand turns the
steering wheel, our car drifting as I grip onto him like  a lifeline.  Must have
blacked out because I don’t remember that.
    A   short scene of  my  Tequila Talks  episode plays. Noah answers the
question I ask about his dream girl, but  he intensely gazes at me while he

310
responds. I stare straight at the tequila bottle and pick at the label instead of
meeting his eyes.
    I  swear my  heart has never beat this fast,  questioning another cardiac
arrest. A  swirl  of  emotions churns  inside of  me:  happiness, excitement,
thankfulness. A whole freaking spectrum.
    The  screen shows a  film   from  a Brazilian   fan based on  the terrible
quality and backdrop. I  crack up while  walking up  the stairs to the Christ
statue. Noah trails behind me, alternating between checking out my ass and
looking up at  the sky like  it can answer his prayers. No such luck  though
because he’s stuck with me.
    Sappiness leaks out of  me, along  with  my tears. “Die  a  Happy Man”
plays low in the background over the part where Noah twirls me around the
air after winning the World Championship. Our smiles mimic each other. A
beautiful mess surrounds us,  with  champagne splashing everywhere and
confetti launchers exploding on the stage.
    I  love this  cocky, self-assured, yet equally selfless and loving man. No
other can ever replace him. I never thought it was possible to love someone
like this.  Unyielding  passion and endless appreciation. Like he hangs the
moon before dancing  with  me under it.  Noah  never letting  a day  go by
where he doesn’t tell or show me how he loves me. A  broken masterpiece
no longer defined by his past.
    Music  cuts out to a black screen. I wipe the tears from my face and look
over at Noah.
    Except he isn’t in his chair anymore.
    He  looks up at me with the smirk  I love, while  he’s down on one knee,
holding a ring box.

311
THE END

312
                  COLLIDED coming May 2020!



                                         



    Want  to  receive    the  latest      news  about



                  Liam and  Sophie’s  story?




Subscribe to my newsletter for exclusives and updates.

Join my Bandini Babes group.

Follow me on Instagram.

313
                                Acknowledgements




                                                       
                                                       
Thank you to everyone who read my debut novel. I am grateful for the
bloggers and readers who gave my work a chance. You deserve your own
champagne shower.

Mr. Smith – I am appreciative of your endless support, including the times
you forced me out of my house to eat and socialize. Your patience, help,
and positive words pushed me to believe in myself and pursue this dream.

Julie – You welcomed me into the book world with warmth and kindness,
and I can’t express my gratitude enough. You’re a fantastic individual who
has been an integral part of this process. Thank you!

To my beta readers – Thanks for giving my F1 world a chance. With your
feedback and comments, Throttled became everything it is today. I am
forever grateful!

To everyone else who helped me during this process – Thank you from the
bottom of my heart! Without you, none of this would be possible.

